 Help Yourself - 988 Lifeline Skip to content ¡Los servicios de texto y chat de 988 Lifeline ya están disponibles en Español! Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH 988 Lifeline Independent Analysis, Innovative Ideas --> Menu Close Menu Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Home Get Help What to Expect Help Yourself American Indian, Alaska Natives, Indigenous Peoples Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Attempt Survivors Black Mental Health Deaf, Hard of Hearing, Hearing Loss Disaster Survivors Hispanic/Latino Mental Health LGBTQI+ Loss Survivors People with Neurodivergence Veterans & Service Members Youth Help Someone Else Learn Our Crisis Centers Stories of Hope and Recovery Addiction Anxiety Borderline Personality Disorder Depression Eating Disorder Gender Identity PTSD Recent Suicide Attempt Self Harm Sexuality Suicidal Thoughts Suicide Loss Survivor Mental Health & Suicide Prevention Glossary Get Involved Careers Donate Promote National Suicide Prevention Month 988 Day Providers & Professionals Best Practices Our Network Professional Initiatives Research and Evaluation FAQs About Us 988 Lifeline Chat Calling the 988 Lifeline Texting the 988 Lifeline Promoting or Joining the Lifeline Research and Evaluation Fundraising and Donations Media Resources About 988 Interpretation Services --> Search English Español --> Help Yourself If you’re in emotional distress there are options available to help you. You can also contact the 988 Lifeline at any time to connect with a skilled, caring counselor and get support. Confidential support is available 24/7 for everyone in the United States and its territories. Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Home Help Yourself How Can You Help Yourself? Healing, hope, and help can happen. Here are some ways to help you get through challenging times. Find A Therapist/Support Group Speaking to someone, whether by going to a therapist or by attending a support group, can help you feel better and improve your mental health. These resources can help you find a psychologist, psychiatrist, or support group near you. SAMHSA Mental Health Services Locator Psychology Today Therapist and Support Group Finder American Foundation for Suicide Prevention Suicide Bereavement Support Group Finder Therapist Finder through Online Therapy Inclusive Therapist Finder Build A Support Network You don’t have to deal with challenges on your own. Those you choose to confide in can provide encouragement and help you through difficult times. Your World You are part of a larger whole, and you matter. You may feel less isolated when you’re connected more to others. Consider joining an interest group, volunteering, taking a class, or starting a new hobby. Your Social Networks Social media is a place to share how you’re feeling and hear the stories of others who have felt the same. Connecting to people through technology may help you remember that you are not alone, and you may find others with similar interests. Your Community Whether your community is at work, school, church, or a club or a team, having a group of people who encourage help-seeking and support is one of the most important aspects of suicide prevention. Your Circle Of Trust Relationships with friends, family, and significant others built on trust and companionship are a protective factor against suicidal thoughts and behaviors. It’s important to find the people in your life that you can always confide in, feel comfortable around, and can contact at any time. Surround yourself with positive people who motivate you to be your best. Use Your Support Network Leaning on your support network can help you cope during difficult moments and is an important step in getting help and moving forward. Express Yourself During difficult situations, it’s natural to shut down, but keeping your emotions bottled up makes it harder for your support network to help you. Reach out to people you trust who have the ability to be sympathetic and non-judgmental. Keep an Open Mind Keep in mind that the advice and support of others come from a good place. We may not necessarily agree with advice we’re given, but staying open-minded and receptive to outside perspectives and opinions can help strengthen your support network. Show Appreciation The people in your support network will stick with you through thick and thin, but it’s also important to remember that friendships and relationships are a two-way street. Express your appreciation for the love and support that these special people bring into your life. Make A Safety Plan A safety plan is designed to guide you through a crisis. As you continue through the steps, you can get help and feel safer. Keep your plan easily accessible in case you have thoughts of hurting yourself. Recognize your personal warning signs: What thoughts, images, moods, situations, and behaviors indicate to you that a crisis may be developing? Write these down in your own words. Use your own coping strategies: List things that you can do on your own to help you not act on urges to harm yourself. Socialize with others who may offer support as well as distraction from the crisis: List people and social settings that may help take your mind off of difficult thoughts or feelings. Contact family members or friends who may help to resolve a crisis: Make a list of people who are supportive and who you feel you can talk to when under stress. Contact mental health professionals or agencies : Make a list of names, numbers, and/or locations of clinicians, local emergency rooms, and crisis hotlines. Put the 988 Lifeline number, 988, into your phone. Ensure your environment is safe: Have you thought of ways in which you might harm yourself? Work with a counselor to develop a plan to limit your access to these means. Get More Info The federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration offers additional resources for multiple audiences. Faith and Community Engagement Mental Health Treatment Recovery and Recovery Support Suicide Prevention Find Specific Resources For You The 988 Lifeline is available for everyone. We also offer additional resources if you need them. American Indian, Alaska Natives, Indigenous Peoples Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Attempt Survivors Black Mental Health Deaf, Hard of Hearing, Hearing Loss Disaster Survivors Hispanic/Latino Mental Health LGBTQI+ Loss Survivors People with Neurodivergence Veterans & Service Members Youth Musician, SASAMI, shares her relationship between music and mental health, plus a special cover of "Maps" from the Yeah Yeah Yeahs Find Stories of People Like You No matter what you’re struggling with, other people have felt the way you do. Stories of Hope and Recovery Jul 2022, Suicide Loss Survivor Moving America’s Soul on Suicide Sep 2021, Anxiety Why Talking About Suicide Should Be Normalized Mar 2021, Depression I Can Be Happiness Jan 2020, Anxiety Watch Me Dance Watch Me Grow Jan 2020, Suicidal Thoughts Poetically Sane: Halima Shegow Mar 2019, Recent Suicide Attempt Waste of Film: Travis Young Return to Top 988 Lifeline If you need emotional support, reach out to the national mental health hotline: 988. SAMHSA.gov Vibrant.org Contact Us Deaf, Hard of Hearing, Hearing Loss Frequently Asked Questions Media Resources Belonging & Accessibility Confidentiality Privacy Policy Terms of Service Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Donate See988 Lifelineon Instagram See988 Lifelineon Facebook See988 Lifelineon YouTube See988 Lifelineon X Close You are opening a new tab. You are leaving 988lifeline.org for another website. Their content and privacy policies apply. Would you like to continue? Continue Stay here Search Form Search for: Search Close Page Sections Jump to How Can You Help Yourself? section Jump to Find Specific Resources For You section Jump to Musician, SASAMI, shares her relationship between music and mental health, plus a special cover of "Maps" from the Yeah Yeah Yeahs section Jump to Find Stories of People Like You section Accessibility Controls Color Mode System Light Dark High Contrast Off On Dyslexic Font Off On Ways to Connect Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Share Share by Email Link copied ');setTimeout(() => { document.querySelectorAll('.linktooltips-container').forEach(el => el.remove()); }, 3000);" href="#" target="_self" rel="noopener" aria-label=""> Copy Link Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn We value your privacy. Close We use cookies to help us improve your website experience. By accepting, you consent to our use of cookies. If you reject, you will still be able to access the website and chat service. Learn more Privacy Policy . I Accept I Reject 