 Help Someone Else - 988 Lifeline Skip to content ¡Los servicios de texto y chat de 988 Lifeline ya están disponibles en Español! Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH 988 Lifeline Independent Analysis, Innovative Ideas --> Menu Close Menu Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Home Get Help What to Expect Help Yourself American Indian, Alaska Natives, Indigenous Peoples Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Attempt Survivors Black Mental Health Deaf, Hard of Hearing, Hearing Loss Disaster Survivors Hispanic/Latino Mental Health LGBTQI+ Loss Survivors People with Neurodivergence Veterans & Service Members Youth Help Someone Else Learn Our Crisis Centers Stories of Hope and Recovery Addiction Anxiety Borderline Personality Disorder Depression Eating Disorder Gender Identity PTSD Recent Suicide Attempt Self Harm Sexuality Suicidal Thoughts Suicide Loss Survivor Mental Health & Suicide Prevention Glossary Get Involved Careers Donate Promote National Suicide Prevention Month 988 Day Providers & Professionals Best Practices Our Network Professional Initiatives Research and Evaluation FAQs About Us 988 Lifeline Chat Calling the 988 Lifeline Texting the 988 Lifeline Promoting or Joining the Lifeline Research and Evaluation Fundraising and Donations Media Resources About 988 Interpretation Services --> Search English Español --> Help Someone Else If someone you know is struggling emotionally or having a hard time, you can be the difference in getting them the help they need. It’s important to take care of yourself when you are supporting someone through a difficult time, as this may bring up difficult emotions. If it does, please reach out for support yourself. Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Home Help Someone Else Do They Need Your Help? Some warning signs may help you determine if a loved one is at risk for suicide, especially if the behavior is new, has increased, or seems related to a painful event, loss, or change. If you or someone you know exhibits any of these, seek help by contacting the 988 Lifeline. Warning Signs How Can You Help Them? It can be scary when a friend or loved one is having mental health challenges or thinking about suicide. It’s hard to know how a suicidal crisis feels and how to act. Contact 988 at any time for help if a friend is struggling. Contact a 988 Lifeline Center Never keep it a secret if a friend tells you about a plan to hurt themselves. Contact 988 so that you can find out what resources are available in your area, or encourage your loved one to reach out. Calls are routed to your local 988 Lifeline contact center that can provide you with resources. Learn what to expect Use The Do's and Don'ts Talking with and finding help for someone that may be suicidal can be difficult. Here are some tips that may help. Be direct. Talk openly and matter-of-factly about suicide. Be willing to listen. Allow expressions of feelings. Accept the feelings. Be non-judgmental. Don’t debate whether suicide is right or wrong, or whether feelings are good or bad. Don’t lecture on the value of life. Get involved. Become available. Show interest and support. Don’t dare them to do it. Don’t act shocked. This will put distance between you. Don’t be sworn to secrecy. Seek support. Offer hope that alternatives are available but do not offer glib reassurance. Take action. Remove means, like weapons or pills. Get help from people or agencies specializing in crisis intervention and suicide prevention. Use the 5 Action Steps These evidence-based action steps provide a blueprint for reaching and helping someone in crisis. Ask. Be there. Help keep them safe. Help them connect. Follow up. Learn more about these specific steps. Practice Active Listening Hearing someone talk is different from actively listening to what that person is saying. Active listening requires concentration and understanding. Improving your listening skills is easy to do with practice and these helpful tips. Acknowledge the Speaker This can be as simple as a head nod or an “Uh huh.” By acknowledging the speaker, you are letting them know that you are listening to what they have to say and reminding yourself to pay attention to what is being said to you. Respond Verbally Asking questions or making statements may help clarify what the speaker is saying. It reminds the speaker that you are listening attentively and that you are here to help them and are truly concerned. Be sure to let the speaker finish talking before asking any questions. Summarize What You Hear Reflecting on what the listener is saying is also a positive verbal active listening technique. By repeating, paraphrasing or even summarizing what the speaker has said shows that you are putting in effort to better understand them. Use phrases like; “what I’m hearing is…”or, “sounds like you’re saying….” These tactics can also allow the speaker to hear what they are saying, which may help them find positive reinforcement. Look the Part Keeping eye contact, maintaining good posture, and staying focused are key components of active listening and interpersonal communication. Being distracted and unfocused gives the speaker the impression that you aren’t paying attention. When you actively listen to someone, you are letting them know that you care about what they are saying and can indicate that you are concerned for their health and safety. Get More Info The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) offers additional resources on suicide prevention. Visit SAMHSA Online Hear from singer-songwriter Sarah Kinsley about music, mental health, therapy, and community. Listen to her cover of the Cocteau Twins’ Rilkean Heart Social Media Safety Find ways to support people in crisis online, build guidelines for your digital community, and learn how to get help for someone in crisis on different social media platforms. Safety Processes on Social Media Support for Suicidal Individuals on Social and Digital Media (PDF) Return to Top 988 Lifeline If you need emotional support, reach out to the national mental health hotline: 988. SAMHSA.gov Vibrant.org Contact Us Deaf, Hard of Hearing, Hearing Loss Frequently Asked Questions Media Resources Belonging & Accessibility Confidentiality Privacy Policy Terms of Service Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Donate See988 Lifelineon Instagram See988 Lifelineon Facebook See988 Lifelineon YouTube See988 Lifelineon X Close You are opening a new tab. You are leaving 988lifeline.org for another website. Their content and privacy policies apply. Would you like to continue? Continue Stay here Search Form Search for: Search Close Page Sections Jump to Do They Need Your Help? section Jump to How Can You Help Them? section Jump to Hear from singer-songwriter Sarah Kinsley about music, mental health, therapy, and community. section Jump to Social Media Safety section Accessibility Controls Color Mode System Light Dark High Contrast Off On Dyslexic Font Off On Ways to Connect Call Text Chat Deaf/HoH Share Share by Email Link copied ');setTimeout(() => { document.querySelectorAll('.linktooltips-container').forEach(el => el.remove()); }, 3000);" href="#" target="_self" rel="noopener" aria-label=""> Copy Link Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn We value your privacy. Close We use cookies to help us improve your website experience. By accepting, you consent to our use of cookies. If you reject, you will still be able to access the website and chat service. Learn more Privacy Policy . I Accept I Reject 