 About Children's Mental Health | Children’s Mental Health | CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Children’s Mental Health Explore This Topic Search Search Clear Search For Everyone About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View all Related Topics: Mental Health | Salud Mental Home search clear search Children’s Mental Health Menu clear search For Everyone About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View All Related Topics Mental Health Salud Mental Children’s Mental Health About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View Menu About Children's Mental Health June 9, 2025 Español Get help now If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, confidential, free, 24/7/365 help is available. Call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. Resources for help Key points Mental health in childhood includes reaching developmental and emotional milestones, and learning healthy social skills and how to cope when there are problems. The quality of the relationships and environments where children and adolescents grow up shapes their well-being and development. Early diagnosis and access to services for children and their families can make a difference in the lives of children with mental health conditions. Overview Children who experience good well-being and mental health have a positive quality of life and can function well at home, in school, with peers, and in their communities. Mental health is not simply the absence of a mental health condition—it is also about a child's well-being and ability to thrive. Many factors influence a child's well-being and ability to thrive, such as family and community relationships, access to opportunities, and environmental circumstances. Children can experience positive well-being even if they are living with a mental health condition. There may be many reasons for this, including access to effective treatment that helps manage symptoms along with safe, stable, and nurturing relationships and environments in a child's life. Children who don't have a mental health condition may still experience challenges to their mental health, including their development and ability to cope with everyday stressors and toxic stressors . Childhood and adolescence are critical stages of life for mental health. This is a time of rapid growth and brain development. Young people are rapidly learning social-emotional skills that shape their future ability to learn, grow, and adapt to different situations in life. Healthy development means that children of all abilities, including those with special health care needs, can grow up in a home where their social, emotional, and educational needs are met. The quality of the relationships and environments where children and adolescents grow up shapes their well-being and development. Safe, stable, and nurturing relationships and environments provide a strong foundation for children's mental and physical health and opportunity to grow and thrive. Early adverse experiences in homes, schools, or digital spaces increase the risk of mental health problems. This includes experiencing or witnessing violence, living with a parent or other caregiver with substance use or a mental health condition, and not having sufficient or stable housing or food. Symptoms Childhood mental health conditions Many children occasionally experience fears and worries or display disruptive behaviors. If symptoms are severe and persistent and interfere with school, home, or play activities, the child may be diagnosed with a mental health condition. Symptoms of mental health conditions change over time as a child grows and may include difficulties with how they feel, their ability to handle emotions, and how they play, learn, speak, and act. Symptoms for some conditions can start in early childhood, while other do not begin to develop until a bit later in childhood or during the teenage years. Testing and diagnosis If you are concerned about your child's mental health, talk to a health care provider about getting a comprehensive evaluation for your child to get the right diagnosis and treatment. Many mental health disorders are chronic health conditions—conditions that last a long time and often don't go away completely. They can continue through the lifespan. Some conditions may respond quickly to treatment by a trained health care professional and may not recur. Without early diagnosis and treatment, children with mental health conditions can have problems at home, in school, and in forming friendships. Mental health conditions can also interfere with a child's healthy development, causing problems that can continue into adulthood. Diagnosis is often made in the school years but can sometimes be earlier, depending on the condition. However, some children with a mental health condition may not be recognized or diagnosed as having one. Types of mental health conditions Among the more common mental health conditions that can be diagnosed in childhood are anxiety disorders (fears or worries), depressive disorders, and behavior disorders. Health care and mental health professionals use the guidelines in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 1 to help diagnose mental health conditions in children. Learn more about the different types of mental health conditions: Anxiety and Depression in Children Persistent or extreme forms of fear and sadness could be due to anxiety or depression. Behavior or Conduct Problems in Children Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct Disorder are two types of disruptive behavior disorders. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in Children OCD means having frequent unwanted thoughts and behaviors that interfere with activities. Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Children When children develop long-term symptoms from stress due to a traumatic event, they may have PTSD. These conditions can occur alongside others, such as: About Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Read about ADHD, its types, symptoms, possible risk factors, screening, treatment, and CDC's work. About Autism Spectrum Disorder Find out what CDC is doing to better understand ASD to support people with ASD and their families. About Tourette Syndrome Tourette syndrome (TS) is a condition of the nervous system. TS causes people to have "tics." Children's mental health data Mental health conditions affect many children and their families. Boys and girls of all ages and ethnic/racial backgrounds living in all regions of the United States experience mental health conditions. See more children's mental health data . Symptom management: staying healthy Good physical and mental health is important for all children and can be especially important for children living with mental health conditions. In addition to receiving necessary treatment, practicing healthy lifestyle behaviors may reduce the symptoms your child might experience. Here are some healthy behaviors that may help: Engaging in regular physical activity , including aerobic and vigorous exercise Eating a healthful diet centered on fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes (for example, beans, peas, and lentils), lean protein sources, and nuts and seeds Getting the recommended amount of sleep each night based on age Strengthening relationships with family members, friends, and the community Treatment and recovery Childhood mental health conditions can be treated and managed. Many treatment options are based on the best and most current medical evidence. Parents and doctors should work closely with everyone involved in the child's treatment—teachers, coaches, therapists, and other family members. Taking advantage of all available resources will help parents, health professionals, and educators guide the child toward success. Spotlight Early diagnosis and access to services for children and their families can make a difference in the lives of children with mental health conditions. Learn more about treatment . What CDC is doing Public health includes mental health CDC works with partner agencies to better understand mental health and mental health conditions and their impact on children. CDC and its partners provide information and resources on supporting parents as well as children throughout healthy development to ensure they can thrive and grow. Supporting children's mental health also includes improving access to care and ensuring children have safe, stable, and nurturing relationships and environments . Keep Reading Protecting the Nation's Mental Health What you can do Parents: You know your child best. Talk to your child's health care professional or a teacher if you have concerns about how your child behaves at home, in school, or with friends. Youth: Mental health is just as important as physical health. If you are angry, worried, or sad, don't be afraid to talk about your feelings and reach out to a trusted friend or adult. Health care professionals : Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment based on updated guidelines are very important. There are resources available to help diagnose and treat children's mental health conditions. Keep up to date with screening recommendations for anxiety and depression. Teachers/school administrators: Early identification is important so that children can get the help they need. Work with families and healthcare professionals if you have concerns about the mental health of a child in your school. See CDC's mental health action guide for school and district leaders to learn more about supporting mental health in schools. Resources CDC CDC's Essentials for Parenting CDC's Adverse Childhood Experiences CDC's Safety and Children with Disabilities CDC's Before, During, and After An Emergency CDC's Resources for Early Care and Education Providers Tips for a strong start to the school year! (hhs.gov) – Teens Tips for a positive start to the school year! (cdc.gov) – Parents and Caregivers CDC's Mental Health Homepage External Mental Health Resources for Families (aap.org) Digital Shareables on Child and Adolescent Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) ACF and Behavioral Health | The Administration for Children and Families (hhs.gov) On This Page Overview Symptoms Testing and diagnosis Symptom management: staying healthy Treatment and recovery What CDC is doing Resources June 9, 2025 Sources Print Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Syndicate Content Source: National Center for Injury Prevention & Control References American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed., text rev.). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787 Children’s Mental Health About Children's Mental Health View All About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health Sign up for Email Updates Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs About CDC Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications HHS.gov USA.gov 