 Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health | Children’s Mental Health | CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Children’s Mental Health Explore This Topic Search Search Clear Search For Everyone About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View all Related Topics: Mental Health | Salud Mental Home search clear search Children’s Mental Health Menu clear search For Everyone About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View All Related Topics Mental Health Salud Mental Children’s Mental Health About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health View Menu Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health June 5, 2025 Español Get help now If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, confidential, free, 24/7/365 help is available. Call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. Resources for help Purpose The information on this page provides data about indicators of positive mental health in children and mental health conditions that are most common in children. Children's mental health data Indicators of positive mental health are present in most children . National U.S. data from 2022-2023 show that: Nearly 4 out of 5 children ages 6 months to 5 years (78%) exhibit all of 4 indicators of flourishing: 1 96% usually or always are affectionate and tender with parents or caregivers. 82% usually or always bounce back quickly when things do not go their way. 95% usually or always show interest and curiosity in learning new things. 99% usually or always smile and laugh. 3 out of 5 children ages 6 to 17 (60%) exhibit all of 3 indicators of flourishing: 1 83% usually or always show interest and curiosity in learning new things. 72% usually or always stay calm and in control when faced with a challenge. 80% usually or always work to finish tasks they start. Childhood mental health conditions affect many children and families. Nearly 1 in 5 children ages 3 to 17 (21%) had ever been diagnosed with a mental, emotional, or behavioral health condition (2021). 2 Mental health conditions can begin in early childhood and the prevalence changes with age. Although there are some exceptions, most mental health conditions are more common with increased age (see 2022-2023 data below). 1 Anxiety problems, behavior disorders, and depression are the most commonly diagnosed mental disorders in children. Based on US data from 2022–2023: 1 11% of children ages 3-17 had current, diagnosed anxiety (9% of males and 12% of females). 8% of children ages 3-17 had current, diagnosed behavior disorders (10% of males and 5% of females) 4% of children ages 3-17 had current, diagnosed depression (3% of males and 6% of females). Data on other co-occurring conditions are below: Data and Statistics on ADHD CDC uses datasets from parent surveys and healthcare claims to understand diagnosis and treatment pa... Data and Statistics on Autism Spectrum Disorder Summary and table of prevalence of ASD among children in the United States. Data and Statistics on Tourette Syndrome CDC's latest data on Tourette syndrome. It's important to remember that diagnosed conditions do not tell the whole story about mental distress in children . This is because children can also experience some symptoms without meeting criteria for a condition, or they can meet criteria for diagnosis but remain undiagnosed. Teen mental health, substance use, and suicide Among adolescents, mental health, substance use, and suicide are concerns. Data obtained directly from youth can tell us more about the scope of these problems. Among US adolescents ages 12-17 in 2021-2023: 3 20% reported symptoms of anxiety in the past two weeks. 18% reported symptoms of depression in the past two weeks. Among US high school students in 2023: 4 40% reported persistent feelings of sadness or hopelessness in the past year. 20% reported seriously considering attempting suicide in the past year. 16% reported making a suicide plan in the past year. 9% reporting attempting suicide in the past year. 22% report drinking alcohol in the past 30 days. 17% report using marijuana in the past 30 days. 4% report misusing prescription pain medication in the past 30 days. 10% report ever using illicit drugs. Keep Reading High-Risk Substance Use Among Youth Keep Reading Facts About Suicide Many adolescents discuss mental health with health care providers and receive treatment, but there are still gaps in treatment to support youth. Using national data collected from adolescents during 2021-2023, in the past 12 months: 3 More than half (55%) of U.S. adolescents reported discussing their mental and emotional health with a health care professional. 16% of adolescents reported taking any prescription medication to help with their emotions, concentration, behavior, or mental health. 20% of adolescents reported receiving mental health therapy. 20% of adolescents ages 12-17 reported having unmet mental health care needs. Looking for more adolescent mental health data? Explore more mental health and well-being data among U.S. youth and adults on CDC's Mental Health Data Channel . Childhood experiences Children and adolescents may have experiences that support or harm their mental health. Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are potentially traumatic experiences in childhood that have a profound impact on physical and mental health. Learn more about ACEs , how they can be prevented, and their impacts on mental and physical health. Positive childhood experiences (PCEs) are experiences in childhood that support children’s ability to live and grow in safe, stable, nurturing relationships and environments. The more PCEs a child or adolescent has, the less likely they are to have diagnosed mental health conditions. 5 We all have a role to play in ensuring that all children and adolescents have positive experiences. There is more we can do to foster these experiences, so all children reach their full potential and live healthy lives. Data from adolescents ages 12-17 in 2021-2023 indicate that: 3 58% report they always or usually receive social and emotional support. 49% report they receive peer support a lot of the time. 66% report they receive parent support a lot of the time. 79% report they have at least one adult in their life who makes a positive difference. Children and adolescents may also engage in activities that promote wellbeing. These can include, but are not limited to, participating in activities that they enjoy, exercising, and other physical activity. Data from adolescents ages 12-17 in 2021-2023 indicate that: 3 61% report being physically active for at least an hour most days. 36% report strength training most days. 60% report playing on a sports team in the past year. 28% report meditating in the past year. 21% of adolescents report practicing yoga in the past year. Children's mental health data sources Health care providers, researchers, educators, policy makers, and others can get information about the prevalence of children's mental health and mental health conditions from a variety of sources in the United States. See Also Read more about using different data sources. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) assesses health and nutritional status through interviews and physical examinations. Mental health topics include conditions, symptoms, and concerns associated with mental health and substance abuse, as well as the use and need for mental health services. National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) collects data on children's mental health, conditions such as ADHD, autism spectrum disorder, depression, and anxiety problems, and the use and need for mental health services. National Health Interview Survey – Teen (NHIS-Teen) collects data directly from teenagers between the ages of 12-17 on a variety of health topic areas, including doctor visits, sleep, physical activity, injuries, mental health, social and emotional support, and experiences with bullying and discrimination. National Survey of Children's Health (NSCH) examines the health of children, with emphasis on wellbeing. It includes medical homes, family interactions, the health of parents, school and after-school experiences, and safe neighborhoods. National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) gathers information on family life, marriage and divorce, pregnancy, infertility, use of contraception, and general and reproductive health. NSFG includes data on individuals ages 15-49. Mental health topics covered in NSFG include alcohol and drug use. National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) , administered by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), provides national- and state-level data on the use of tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drugs (including non-medical use of prescription drugs), as well as data on substance use disorders, major depressive disorder, any other mental health conditions, and access to treatment for depression. Participants include individuals ages 12 and older. National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) contains vital statistics from the official records of live births, deaths, causes of death, marriages, divorces, and annulments recorded by states and independent registration areas. National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS) is a nationally representative school-based survey on tobacco use by public school students in grades 6-12. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS) measures health-related behaviors and experiences that can lead to death and disability among youth and adults. The YRBSS monitors health-risk behaviors, including tobacco use, substance abuse, unintentional injuries and violence, sexual behaviors that contribute to unintended pregnancy, and sexually transmitted diseases. Additional resources Healthy People 2030 sets data-driven national objectives to improve health and well-being over the next decade, including children's mental health and well-being. Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS) is an interactive database system that provides customized reports of injury-related data. On This Page Children's mental health data Teen mental health, substance use, and suicide Childhood experiences Children's mental health data sources Additional resources June 5, 2025 Sources Print Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Syndicate Content Source: National Center for Injury Prevention & Control References Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative. (2022-2023). National Survey of Children's Health. Data Resource Center for Child and Adolescent Health supported by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://nschdata.org/browse/survey?s=2&y=51&r=1&#home Leeb, R.T., Danielson, M.L., Claussen, A.H., Robinson, L.R., Lebrun-Harris, L.A., Ghandour, R, et al. (2024). Trends in Mental, Behavioral, and Developmental Disorders Among Children and Adolescents in the US, 2016–2021. Prev Chronic Dis 21:240142. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd21.240142 National Center for Health Statistics. (2021-2023). National Health Interview Survey— Teen. Generated interactively: May 12, 2025 from https://wwwn.cdc.gov/NHISDataQueryTool/NHIS_TEEN/index.html Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2024). Youth Risk Behavior Survey Data Summary & Trends Report: 2013–2023 . Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/yrbs/dstr/ . Anderson, K.N., et al. (2024). Prevalence of Positive Childhood Experiences and Associations with Current Anxiety, Depression, and Behavioral or Conduct Problems among U.S. Children Aged 6–17 Years. Adversity and Resilience Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42844-024-00138-z Children’s Mental Health About Children's Mental Health View All About Treatment Data and Statistics on Children's Mental Health Sign up for Email Updates Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs About CDC Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications HHS.gov USA.gov 