 Mental Health Data Channel | Mental Health | CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Mental Health Explore This Topic Search Search Clear Search For Everyone About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View all Related Topics: Children's Mental Health | Emotional Well-Being Home search clear search Mental Health Menu clear search For Everyone About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View All Home Related Topics Children's Mental Health Emotional Well-Being Mental Health About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View Menu Mental Health Data Channel Mar. 26, 2026 Get help now If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, confidential, free, 24/7/365 help is available. Call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. See Resources for help . Purpose The CDC Mental Health Data Channel gives an overview of national and state level data from CDC data sources, showcasing trends in mental health and well-being among youth and adults in the United States. Both mental and physical health are essential to overall health. Understanding these data can help us take actions to improve the nation's mental health, including strengthening conditions where we learn, live, work, and play. Mental health data highlights Youth mental health 29% or 1 in 3 U.S. high school students reported their mental health was not good most of the time or always during the past 30 days. See more Life Satisfaction & Healthy Days data . Adult depression 19% or 1 in 5 U.S. adults were ever told by a doctor or other health care professional that they had any type of depression disorder. See more Mental Health Conditions & Care data . Adult social and emotional support 82% or 4 in 5 U.S. adults, felt they received the social and emotional support they needed. See more Community & Connection data . Explore mental health data, trends, and resources Understanding data from across CDC sources can help paint a comprehensive picture of the overall state of mental health and well-being among youth and adults. Explore the topics below to learn more. CDC Mental Health Data Channel Introduction Transcript Life Satisfaction & Healthy Days Data and resources on life satisfaction and youth and adult physical and mental health status. Mental Health Conditions & Care Data and resources on youth and adult depression and anxiety and adult mental health care. Community & Connection Data and resources on youth and adult feelings of loneliness and social connection and support. Mental Health-Related Emergency Department Visits National data on youth and adult mental health-related visits to the emergency department (ED). Suicidal Thoughts & Behavior National data on suicide-related ED visits and suicidal thoughts and attempts among youth. Looking for more data on children? This data channel does not currently display data for children under 12 years of age. See our page on data and statistics for children's mental health . Mental health definitions Mental health is the component of behavioral health that includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. 1 Mental health is a state of well-being that enables us to cope with the stresses of life, realize our abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to our community. 2 Mental distress 3 is a general term for a subjective sense of discomfort, mental anguish, perceived lack of control, anxiety, or stress. This state is also known as psychological distress. Well-being 4 is a state of positive functioning and general satisfaction with life, including the presence of positive emotions. This state may also be due to economic, environmental, and social conditions that contribute to a sense of purpose and meaning. A mental health condition is an illness or disorder that affects your thinking, feeling, behavior, or mood. 5 Health care professionals use guidelines in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders to diagnose mental health conditions. 6 CDC's prevention approach Addressing the nation's mental health crisis relies on more than treatment. CDC focuses on the drivers of well-being and mental distress to promote well-being and prevent mental health conditions before they develop or worsen, particularly among youth. Learn more about CDC's approach . Have feedback on the Mental Health Data Channel? Take our short survey. On This Page Mental health data highlights Explore mental health data, trends, and resources Mental health definitions CDC's prevention approach Mar. 26, 2026 Sources Print Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Syndicate Content Source: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control References SAMHSA. (2023). What is Mental Health . Retrieved April 10, 2024 from https://www.samhsa.gov/mental-health World Health Organization. (2022). Mental health. Retrieved on June 24, 2024 from https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response American Psychological Association (APA). (2018). Dictionary of psychology: Psychological distress . Retrieved on April 10, 2024 from https://dictionary.apa.org/psychological-distress ; SAMHSA. (2023). Warning signs and risk factors for emotional distress. Retrieved on April 10, 2024 from https://www.samhsa.gov/find-help/disaster-distress-helpline/warning-signs-risk-factors . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Well-being concepts . Retrieved on April 10, 2024 from https://archive.cdc.gov/#/details?url=https://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/wellbeing.htm ; WHO. (2024). Promoting well-being. Retrieved on April 10, 2024 from https://www.who.int/activities/promoting-well-being . SAMHSA. (2023). Mental health and substance use disorders. Retrieved on April 10, 2024 from https://www.samhsa.gov/find-help/disorders . American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed., text rev.). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787 Mental Health Learn about mental health basics and data, and where to get help and support. View All About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma Sign up for Email Updates Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs About CDC Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications HHS.gov USA.gov 