 Suicidal Thoughts & Behavior | Mental Health | CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Mental Health Explore This Topic Search Search Clear Search For Everyone About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View all Related Topics: Children's Mental Health | Emotional Well-Being Home search clear search Mental Health Menu clear search For Everyone About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View All Home Related Topics Children's Mental Health Emotional Well-Being Mental Health About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma View Menu Suicidal Thoughts & Behavior Apr. 22, 2026 Get help now If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, confidential, free, 24/7/365 help is available. Call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. See Resources for help . About This page shares information about U.S. emergency department (ED) visits related to suicide for both youth and adults, as well as survey data on suicidal thoughts and attempts among youth. Data are available at the national and state levels by age, sex, and race and ethnicity, for recent years. What to know Suicide is a leading cause of death among youth and adults in the U.S. For every American who dies by suicide, many more make a plan or attempt suicide and may seek care in an emergency department (ED). 1 About 49% of all people who die by suicide have a history of a known diagnosed mental health condition, and mental health conditions may go undiagnosed. 2 Ensuring that people get access to mental health care when they need it can help reduce the risk of suicide. At the same time, about half of all people who die by suicide do not have a known diagnosed mental health condition at their time of death. Many factors at the individual, relationship, and community levels can contribute to suicide. National Strategy for Suicide Prevention The National Strategy for Suicide Prevention (2024) promotes a coordinated, comprehensive approach to suicide prevention in communities across the country. The Federal Action Plan prioritizes actions for CDC and other agencies, including strengthening data and implementing suicide prevention practices within communities, health care settings, and schools. ED visits related to suspected suicide attempts data National: Rate of ED visits related to suspected suicide attempts Out of every 100,000 ED visits, 154 visits were related to suspected suicide attempts as of March 2026. Suicide risk among veterans Veterans experience higher suicide rates than the general population. 3 To address this, the CDC's Comprehensive Suicide Prevention program is helping states implement interventions for veterans. The Make the Connection campaign also features stories, videos, and mental health information for veterans. Youth considered attempting suicide data National & by state: Youth who reported considering attempting suicide Most recent 2023 data show 20% or 1 in 5 U.S. high school students reported seriously considered attempting suicide in the past year. Suicide risk among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) youth CDC's Tribal Suicide Prevention Program supports tribes to identify, implement, evaluate, and improve community-based interventions that reduce risk factors for suicide. Youth made a suicide plan data National & by state: Youth who reported making a suicide plan Most recent 2023 data show 16% or 1 in 6 U.S. high school students reported making a suicide plan in the past year. Starting conversations If you are concerned about someone who is struggling with their mental health, taking the time to check in on them can help. If needed, follow these five evidence-based action steps for communicating with someone who may be suicidal. Youth attempted suicide data National & by state: Youth who reported attempting suicide Most recent 2023 data show 10% or 1 in 10 U.S. high school students reported attempting suicide in the past year. Notice Confidence interval (CI) of 95% indicates that 95% of the time, the value is expected to fall within this estimated range. CI is shown in black lines at the top of each bar within the bar charts. For statistical tests used, refer to data notes . Explore original data source tools CDC supports national and state level data systems to help us understand mental health in the U.S. This page features data excerpted from select systems. National Syndromic Surveillance Program (NSSP) tracks symptoms and diagnoses of patients in EDs and other settings, in near real-time, so that public health officials can detect unusual levels of illness to determine whether a response is needed. Local and state health departments, CDC, and partners collaborate to collect and provide ED data. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBS) Explorer displays data on mental health, social and emotional support, bullying, racism, suicide, and social media use. You can select Other Health Topics and Unintentional Injuries and Violence buttons in the tool to view these measures. Keep Reading Mental Health Data Sources Resources CDC's General Mental Health Resources page CDC's Suicide Prevention site CDC's Suicide Data and Statistics page CDC's Health Disparities in Suicide page CDC's Social Connection site Ready to take action? CDC promotes a population health approach that addresses the drivers of well-being and mental distress. Individuals, organizations, and communities can adopt strategies to promote well-being and prevent mental health conditions before they develop or worsen. Resources for Population Mental Health On This Page What to know ED visits related to suspected suicide attempts data Youth considered attempting suicide data Youth made a suicide plan data Youth attempted suicide data Explore original data source tools Resources Apr. 22, 2026 Sources Print Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Syndicate Content Source: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control References CDC. (2024). Facts about Suicide . Retrieved March 25, 2025 from https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/facts/index.html Nguyen, B.L., Lyons, B.H., Forsberg, K., et al. (2024). Surveillance for Violent Deaths — National Violent Death Reporting System, 48 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, 2021. MMWR Surveill Summ 73(No. SS-5), 1–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss7305a1 CDC. (2025). Health disparities in suicide. Retrieved March 27, 2025 from https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/disparities/index.html Mental Health Learn about mental health basics and data, and where to get help and support. View All About Caring for Yourself and Others Managing Stress Mental Health Data Channel Mental Health Stigma Sign up for Email Updates Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications Contact Us Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Contact CDC About CDC Pressroom Organization Budget & Funding Careers & Jobs About CDC Policies Accessibility External Links Privacy Web Policies FOIA OIG No Fear Act Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Languages Languages Español Language Assistance Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English Archive CDC Archive Public Health Publications HHS.gov USA.gov 