 Insomnia | MedlinePlus Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia Español You Are Here: Home → Health Topics → Insomnia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/insomnia.html Insomnia On this page Basics Summary Start Here Diagnosis and Tests Treatments and Therapies Learn More No links available See, Play and Learn Test Your Knowledge Research Clinical Trials Journal Articles Resources Find an Expert For You Teenagers Women Patient Handouts Summary What is insomnia? Insomnia is a common sleep disorder . If you have it, you may have trouble falling asleep, staying asleep, or both. As a result, you may get too little sleep or have poor-quality sleep. You may not feel refreshed when you wake up. What are the types of insomnia? Insomnia can be acute (short-term) or chronic (ongoing). Acute insomnia is common. Common causes include stress at work, family pressures, or a traumatic event. It usually lasts for days or weeks. Chronic insomnia lasts for a month or longer. Most cases of chronic insomnia are secondary. This means they are the symptom or side effect of some other problem, such as certain medical conditions, medicines, and other sleep disorders. Substances such as caffeine , tobacco, and alcohol can also be a cause. Sometimes chronic insomnia is the primary problem. This means that it is not caused by something else. Its cause is not well understood, but long-lasting stress, emotional upset, travel and shift work can be factors. Primary insomnia usually lasts more than one month. Who is at risk for insomnia? Insomnia is common. It affects women more often than men. You can get it at any age, but older adults are more likely to have it. You are also at higher risk of insomnia if you: Have a lot of stress Are depressed or have other emotional distress, such as divorce or death of a spouse Have a lower income Work at night or have frequent major shifts in your work hours Travel long distances with time changes Have an inactive lifestyle Are African American; research shows that African Americans take longer to fall asleep, don't sleep as well, and have more sleep-related breathing problems than Whites. What are the symptoms of insomnia? Symptoms of insomnia include: Lying awake for a long time before you fall asleep Sleeping for only short periods Being awake for much of the night Feeling as if you haven't slept at all Waking up too early What other problems can insomnia cause? Insomnia can cause daytime sleepiness and a lack of energy. It also can make you feel anxious, depressed, or irritable. You may have trouble focusing on tasks, paying attention, learning, and remembering. Insomnia also can cause other serious problems. For example, it could make you feel drowsy while driving. This could cause you get into a car accident. How is insomnia diagnosed? To diagnose insomnia, your health care provider: Takes your medical history Asks for your sleep history. Your provider will ask you for details about your sleep habits. Does a physical exam, to rule out other medical problems that might cause insomnia May recommend a sleep study. A sleep study measures how well you sleep and how your body responds to sleep problems. What are the treatments for insomnia? Treatments include lifestyle changes, counseling, and medicines: Lifestyle changes, including good sleep habits , often help relieve acute (short-term) insomnia. These changes might make it easier for you to fall asleep and stay asleep. A type of counseling called cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) can help relieve the anxiety linked to chronic (ongoing) insomnia Several medicines also can help relieve your insomnia and allow you to re-establish a regular sleep schedule If your insomnia is the symptom or side effect of another problem, it's important to treat that problem (if possible). NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Start Here What Is Insomnia? (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) Also in Spanish Diagnosis and Tests Sleep Study (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish Treatments and Therapies Insomnia Treatment: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Instead of Sleeping Pills (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Prescription Sleeping Pills: What's Right for You? (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Sleep Aids: Understand Options Sold without a Prescription (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Sleep Disorders and Complementary Health Approaches (National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health) Taking Z-drugs for Insomnia? Know the Risks (Food and Drug Administration) Also in Spanish Test Your Knowledge Sleep Myths & Facts Quiz (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov: Sleep Initiation and Maintenance Disorders (National Institutes of Health) ClinicalTrials.gov: Sleeping Pills (National Institutes of Health) Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine) Article: A Randomized Controlled Trial: Evaluating the Sleep, Cancer and Rest (SleepCaRe)... Article: Effects of bright light and near-infrared light on insomnia symptoms in... Article: Examining the Effectiveness of Breathwork to Improve Resilience and Psychological Wellbeing... Insomnia -- see more articles Find an Expert American Academy of Sleep Medicine National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Sleep Center Directory (American Academy of Sleep Medicine) Teenagers Insomnia in Teens: What Parents Should Know (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish What Should I Do If I Can't Sleep? (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish Women Insomnia (Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women's Health) Also in Spanish Patient Handouts Changing your sleep habits (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Insomnia (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Medicines for sleep (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Topic Image MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Can't sleep? Try these tips Changing your sleep habits Insomnia Medicines for sleep Related Health Topics Healthy Sleep Sleep Disorders National Institutes of Health The primary NIH organization for research on Insomnia is the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Other Languages Find health information in languages other than English on Insomnia Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Connect with NLM NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated September 13, 2024 