Self-Harm: MedlinePlus Skip navigation 

An official website of the United States government 

Here’s how you know 

Here’s how you know 

Official websites use .gov 
A .gov website belongs to an official government
 organization in the United States. 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
 the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
 secure websites. 

National Library of Medicine 

Menu 
Health Topics 

Drugs & Supplements 

Genetics 

Medical Tests 

Medical Encyclopedia 

About MedlinePlus 
Search 

Search MedlinePlus 

GO 

About MedlinePlus 

What's New 

Site Map 

Customer Support 

Health Topics 

Drugs & Supplements 

Genetics 

Medical Tests 

Medical Encyclopedia 

Español 

You Are Here: 
Home → 

Health Topics → 

Self-Harm 

URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/selfharm.html 

Self-Harm Also called: Self-injury 

On this page 

Basics 
Summary 

Start Here 

Treatments and Therapies 

Learn More 
Specifics 

See, Play and Learn 
No links available 

Research 
Clinical Trials 

Journal Articles 

Resources 
Find an Expert 

For You 
Teenagers 

Patient Handouts 

Summary 

What is self-harm? 
Self-harm, or self-injury, is when a person hurts his or her own body on purpose. The injuries may be minor, but sometimes they can be severe. They may leave permanent scars or cause serious health problems. Some examples are: 

Cutting yourself (such as using a razor blade, knife, or other sharp object to cut your skin) 

Punching yourself or punching things (like a wall) 

Burning yourself with cigarettes, matches, or candles 

Pulling out your hair 

Poking objects through body openings 

Breaking your bones or bruising yourself 

Self-harm is not a mental disorder. It is a behavior - an unhealthy way to cope with strong feelings. However, some of the people who harm themselves do have a mental disorder . 

People who harm themselves are usually not trying to attempt suicide . But they are at higher risk of attempting suicide if they do not get help. 

Why do people harm themselves? 
There are different reasons why people harm themselves. Often, they have trouble coping and dealing with their feelings. They harm themselves to try to: 

Make themselves feel something (because they feel empty or numb inside) 

Block upsetting memories 

Show that they need help 

Release strong feelings that overwhelm them, such as anger, loneliness, or hopelessness 

Punish themselves 

Feel a sense of control 

Who is at risk for self-harm? 
There are people of all ages who harm themselves, but it usually starts in the teen or early adult years. Self-harm is more common in people who: 

Were abused or went through a trauma as children 

Have mental disorders, such as 
Depression 

Eating disorders 

Post-traumatic stress disorder 

Certain personality disorders 

Misuse drugs or alcohol 

Have friends who self-harm 

Have low self-esteem 

What are the signs of self-harm? 
Signs that someone may be hurting themselves include: 

Having frequent cuts, bruises, or scars 

Wearing long sleeves or pants even in hot weather 

Making excuses about injuries 

Having sharp objects around for no clear reason 

How can I help someone who self-harms? 
If someone you know is self-harming, it is important not to be judgmental. Let that person know that you want to help. If the person is a child or teenager, ask him or her to talk to a trusted adult. If he or she won't do that, talk to a trusted adult yourself. If the person who is self-harming is an adult, suggest mental health counseling. 

What the treatments are for self-harm? 
There are no medicines to treat self-harming behaviors. But there are medicines to treat any mental disorders that the person may have, such as anxiety and depression. Treating the mental disorder may weaken the urge to self-harm. 

Mental health counseling or therapy can also help by teaching the person: 

Problem-solving skills 

New ways to cope with strong emotions 

Better relationship skills 

Ways to strengthen self-esteem 

If the problem is severe, the person may need more intensive treatment in a psychiatric hospital or a mental health day program. 

Start Here 

Self-Harm (NAMI) 

Self-Harm and Trauma (National Center for PTSD) 

When Children and Teens Self-Harm (American Academy of Pediatrics) Also in Spanish 

Treatments and Therapies 

Mental Health Medications (National Institute of Mental Health) 

Psychotherapies (National Institute of Mental Health) 

Specifics 

Cutting & Self-Injury (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish 

Self Harm -- Cutting (American Academy of Family Physicians) 

Clinical Trials 

ClinicalTrials.gov: Self-Injurious Behavior (National Institutes of Health) 

ClinicalTrials.gov: Trichotillomania (National Institutes of Health) 

Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine) 

Article: Effectiveness of Pleasure Perception Training Group Therapy on Adolescents With Depression... 

Article: Parents' coping with their adolescent's negative emotions following internet-delivered emotion regulation... 

Article: Early Evaluation of IMAGINATOR 2.0 Intervention Targeting Self-Harm in Young People:... 

Self-Harm -- see more articles 

Find an Expert 

American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 

FindTreatment.gov (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) Also in Spanish 

National Institute of Mental Health Also in Spanish 

Psychologist Locator (American Psychological Association) 

Teenagers 

How Can I Help a Friend Who Cuts? (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish 

How Can I Stop Cutting? (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish 

Trichotillomania (Hair Pulling) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish 

Patient Handouts 

Trichotillomania (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish 

Topic Image 

MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA 

Trichotillomania 

Related Health Topics 

Child Behavior Disorders 

Mental Disorders 

Suicide 

Teen Mental Health 

National Institutes of Health 

The primary NIH organization for research on Self-Harm is the National Institute of Mental Health 

Disclaimers 

MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . 

The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. 

Learn how to cite this page 

About MedlinePlus 

What's New 

Site Map 

Customer Support 

Subscribe to RSS 

Connect with NLM 

NLM Web Policies 

Copyright 

Accessibility 

Guidelines for Links 

Viewers & Players 

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs 

For Developers 

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health 

Last updated October 17, 2023