 Schizophrenia: MedlinePlus Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia Español You Are Here: Home → Health Topics → Schizophrenia URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/schizophrenia.html Schizophrenia On this page Basics Summary Start Here Treatments and Therapies Learn More Living With Related Issues Specifics Genetics See, Play and Learn Health Check Tools Research Clinical Trials Journal Articles Resources Find an Expert For You Children Patient Handouts Summary Schizophrenia is a serious brain illness. People who have it may hear voices that aren't there. They may think other people are trying to hurt them. Sometimes they don't make sense when they talk. The disorder makes it hard for them to keep a job or take care of themselves. Symptoms of schizophrenia usually start between ages 16 and 30. Men often develop symptoms at a younger age than women. People usually do not get schizophrenia after age 45. There are three types of symptoms: Psychotic symptoms distort a person's thinking. These include hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not there), delusions (beliefs that are not true), trouble organizing thoughts, and strange movements. "Negative" symptoms make it difficult to show emotions and to function normally. A person may seem depressed and withdrawn. Cognitive symptoms affect the thought process. These include trouble using information, making decisions, and paying attention. No one is sure what causes schizophrenia. Your genes, environment, and brain chemistry may play a role. There is no cure. Medicine can help control many of the symptoms. You may need to try different medicines to see which works best. You should stay on your medicine for as long as your doctor recommends. Additional treatments can help you deal with your illness from day to day. These include therapy, family education, rehabilitation, and skills training. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health Start Here Schizophrenia (NAMI) Schizophrenia (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish Schizophrenia (American Psychiatric Association) Treatments and Therapies Brain Stimulation Therapies (National Institute of Mental Health) Mental Health Medications (National Institute of Mental Health) Psychotherapies (National Institute of Mental Health) Living With Managing Life with Serious Mental Illness (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) Related Issues Mental Health Providers: Tips on Finding One (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Specifics Schizoaffective Disorder (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Understanding Psychosis (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish Genetics Schizophrenia: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine) Health Check Tools Psychosis and Schizophrenia Test (Mental Health America) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov: Schizophrenia (National Institutes of Health) Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine) Article: Electroconvulsive Therapy in Schizophrenia: Exploratory Study on the Efficacy, Cognitive Effects,... Article: Autonomy Support from Healthcare Professionals Improves Functioning in Early Psychosis Through... Article: Symptom Network Dynamics during Antipsychotic Treatment in First-Episode Psychosis. Schizophrenia -- see more articles Find an Expert FindTreatment.gov (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) Also in Spanish Help for Mental Illnesses (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish NAMI National Institute of Mental Health Also in Spanish Children Schizophrenia in Children, Teens and Young Adults (American Academy of Pediatrics) Also in Spanish Patient Handouts Mental status testing (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Schizoaffective disorder (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Schizophrenia (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Topic Image MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Hallucinations Mental status testing Schizoaffective disorder Schizophrenia National Institutes of Health The primary NIH organization for research on Schizophrenia is the National Institute of Mental Health Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Connect with NLM NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated May 26, 2025 