 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: MedlinePlus Skip navigation An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. National Library of Medicine Menu Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia About MedlinePlus Search Search MedlinePlus GO About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Health Topics Drugs & Supplements Genetics Medical Tests Medical Encyclopedia Español You Are Here: Home → Health Topics → Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/obsessivecompulsivedisorder.html Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Also called: OCD On this page Basics Summary Start Here Diagnosis and Tests Treatments and Therapies Learn More Related Issues Specifics Genetics See, Play and Learn No links available Research Statistics and Research Clinical Trials Journal Articles Resources Find an Expert For You Children Teenagers Patient Handouts Summary What is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental disorder in which you have thoughts (obsessions) and rituals (compulsions) over and over. They interfere with your life, but you cannot control or stop them. What causes obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) usually begins when you are a teen or young adult. Boys often develop OCD at a younger age than girls. Risk factors for OCD include: Family history. People with a first-degree relative (such as a parent, sibling, or child) who has OCD are at higher risk. This is especially true if the relative developed OCD as a child or teen. Brain structure and functioning. Imaging studies have shown that people with OCD have differences in certain parts of the brain. Researchers need to do more studies to understand the connection between the brain differences and OCD. Childhood trauma, such as child abuse . Some studies have found a link between trauma in childhood and OCD. More research is needed to understand this relationship better. In some cases, children may develop OCD or OCD symptoms following a streptococcal infection . This is called Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS). What are the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? People with OCD may have symptoms of obsessions, compulsions, or both: Obsessions are repeated thoughts, urges, or mental images that cause anxiety . They may involve things such as Fear of germs or contamination Fear of losing or misplacing something Worries about harm coming towards yourself or others Unwanted forbidden thoughts involving sex or religion Aggressive thoughts towards yourself or others Needing things lined up exactly or arranged in a particular, precise way Compulsions are behaviors that you feel like you need to do over and over to try to reduce your anxiety or stop the obsessive thoughts. Some common compulsions include Excessive cleaning and/or handwashing Repeatedly checking on things, such as whether the door is locked or the oven is off Compulsive counting Ordering and arranging things in a particular, precise way Some people with OCD also have Tourette syndrome or another tic disorder. Tics are sudden twitches, movements, or sounds that people do over and over. People who have tics cannot stop their body from doing these things. How is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) diagnosed? The first step is to talk with your health care provider about your symptoms. It's important to check whether a physical problem is causing your symptoms. So your provider will do a physical exam and will ask you about your medical history. If your symptoms do not seem to be caused by a physical problem, your provider may do an OCD test or may refer you to a mental health specialist for further evaluation or treatment. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can sometimes be hard to diagnose. Its symptoms are like those of other mental disorders, such as anxiety disorders. It is also possible to have both OCD and another mental disorder. Not everyone who has obsessions or compulsions has OCD. Your symptoms would usually be considered OCD when you: Can't control your thoughts or behaviors, even when you know that they are excessive Spend at least 1 hour a day on these thoughts or behaviors Don't get pleasure when performing the behaviors. But doing them may briefly give you relief from the anxiety. Have significant problems in your daily life because of these thoughts or behaviors What are the treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The main treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are cognitive behavioral therapy, medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy. It teaches you different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to your obsessions and compulsions. Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP) s a specific type of CBT. ERP involves gradually exposing you to your fears or obsessions. You learn healthy ways to deal with the anxiety they cause. Medicines for OCD include certain types of antidepressants . If those don't work for you, your provider may suggest taking some other type of psychiatric medicine. If you have severe OCD that does not get better with these treatments, your provider may suggest a treatment called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). It is a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves. It can target specific brain areas associated with OCD. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health Start Here Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (American Academy of Family Physicians) Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) (National Institute of Mental Health) Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: When Unwanted Thoughts or Repetitive Behaviors Take Over (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish When Unwanted Thoughts Intrude: Understanding Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (National Institutes of Health) Also in Spanish Diagnosis and Tests Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) Test (National Library of Medicine) Also in Spanish Treatments and Therapies Mental Health Medications (National Institute of Mental Health) Psychotherapies (National Institute of Mental Health) Related Issues Disorders Related to (And Sometimes Confused with) OCD (International OCD Foundation) How to Find the Right Therapist (International OCD Foundation) Specifics Hoarding disorder (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Problem That Piles Up: When Hoarding Is a Disorder (National Institutes of Health) Genetics Obsessive-compulsive disorder: MedlinePlus Genetics (National Library of Medicine) Statistics and Research Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) among Adults (National Institute of Mental Health) Clinical Trials ClinicalTrials.gov: Hoarding Disorder (National Institutes of Health) ClinicalTrials.gov: Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (National Institutes of Health) Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine) Article: The mosaic of experience: How individual differences in attention and working... Article: Effectiveness of low-intensity cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder in routine psychiatric... Article: Validation of a Low-Burden, Once-Daily Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Measure Over 70 Days:... Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder -- see more articles Find an Expert American Psychiatric Association Anxiety and Depression Association of America Find Your Therapist (Anxiety and Depression Association of America) FindTreatment.gov (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) Also in Spanish Help for Mental Illnesses (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish National Institute of Mental Health Also in Spanish Children Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish OCD (Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish PANS (Pediatric Acute-onset Neuropsychiatric Syndrome) and PANDAS (Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections): Questions and Answers (National Institute of Mental Health) Also in Spanish Teenagers Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish Patient Handouts Obsessive-compulsive disorder (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Topic Image MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA Are you getting too much exercise? Obsessive-compulsive disorder National Institutes of Health The primary NIH organization for research on Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is the National Institute of Mental Health Disclaimers MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our disclaimer about external links and our quality guidelines . The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health. Learn how to cite this page About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support Subscribe to RSS Connect with NLM NLM Web Policies Copyright Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players HHS Vulnerability Disclosure MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Last updated October 17, 2023 