 Overview - Depression in adults - NHS Skip to main content NHS Search the NHS website Search Health A to Z NHS services Healthy living Mental health Care and support Browse More Home Health A to Z Mental health Mental health conditions Depression in adults Back to Depression in adults Overview - Depression in adults Depression is more than simply feeling unhappy or fed up for a few days. Most people go through periods of feeling down, but when you're depressed you feel persistently sad for weeks or months, rather than just a few days. Some people think depression is trivial and not a genuine health condition. They're wrong – it is a real illness with real symptoms. Depression is not a sign of weakness or something you can "snap out of" by "pulling yourself together". The good news is that with the right treatment and support, most people with depression can make a full recovery. These pages are about depression in adults. Read about depression in children and young people . How to tell if you have depression Depression affects people in different ways and can cause a wide variety of symptoms. They range from lasting feelings of unhappiness and hopelessness, to losing interest in the things you used to enjoy and feeling very tearful. Many people with depression also have symptoms of anxiety . There can be physical symptoms too, such as feeling constantly tired, sleeping badly, having no appetite or sex drive, and various aches and pains. The symptoms of depression range from mild to severe. At its mildest, you may simply feel persistently low in spirit, while severe depression can make you feel suicidal, that life is no longer worth living. Most people experience feelings of stress, anxiety or low mood during difficult times. A low mood may improve after a short period of time, rather than being a sign of depression. When to see a doctor It's important to seek help from a GP if you think you may be depressed. Many people wait a long time before seeking help for depression, but it's best not to delay. The sooner you see a doctor, the sooner you can be on the way to recovery. What causes depression? Sometimes there's a trigger for depression. Life-changing events, such as bereavement, losing your job or giving birth, can bring it on. People with a family history of depression are more likely to experience it themselves. But you can also become depressed for no obvious reason. Read more about the causes of depression Treating depression Treatment for depression can involve a combination of lifestyle changes, talking therapies and medicine. Your recommended treatment will be based on how severe your depression is. If you have mild depression, your doctor may suggest waiting to see whether it improves on its own, while monitoring your progress. This is known as "watchful waiting". They may also suggest lifestyle measures such as exercise and guided self-help. Talking therapies, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) , may also be used for mild depression. For moderate to severe depression, a combination of talking therapy and antidepressants is often recommended. If you have severe depression, you may be referred to a specialist mental health team for intensive specialist talking treatments and prescribed medicine. Living with depression Many people with depression benefit by making lifestyle changes, such as getting more exercise , cutting down on alcohol , giving up smoking and eating healthily . Reading a self-help book or joining a support group are also worthwhile. They can help you gain a better understanding about what causes you to feel depressed. Sharing your experiences with others in a similar situation can also be very supportive. Information: Social care and support guide If you: need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability care for someone regularly because they're ill or disabled, or because of their age – including family members Our social care and support guide explains your options and where you can get support. Video: Clinical depression – Lawrence's story In this video, Lawrence talks about his experience of clinical depression. Media last reviewed: 1 June 2024 Media review due: 1 June 2027 More in Depression in adults Overview - Depression in adults Symptoms - Depression in adults Causes - Depression in adults Diagnosis - Depression in adults Treatment - Depression in adults Living with - Depression in adults Support groups - Depression in adults Page last reviewed: 5 July 2023 Next review due: 5 July 2026 Support links Home Health A to Z NHS services Healthy living Mental health Care and support COVID-19 NHS App Find my NHS number View your GP health record View your test results About the NHS Healthcare abroad Other NHS websites Profile editor login About us Report an issue with the NHS website Accessibility statement Our policies Cookies © Crown copyright 