 Fall asleep faster and sleep better - Every Mind Matters - NHS Skip to main content Every Mind Matters - Home NHS logo Wellbeing tips Mental health issues Life's challenges Supporting others Urgent support Home Mental wellbeing tips Back to Mental wellbeing tips How to fall asleep faster and sleep better The mental health benefits of good sleep include boosting our mood, reducing stress and helping with anxiety. If you're having trouble sleeping, knowing how to sleep better can make a big difference. On this page you’ll find practical tips to help you to build good sleep hygiene and sleep better. On this page Video: Tips for sleeping better Get sleep tips sent to your inbox 1. Have good sleep routine (sleep hygiene) 2. Relax, unwind and try meditation to help you sleep 3. Try mindfulness for sleep 4. Create the right sleep environment 5. Do not force sleep 6. Improve sleep through diet and exercise More help and support with insomnia and sleep Video: Tips for sleeping better Find out some simple things you can do to help you sleep better. Get sleep tips sent to your inbox Your sleep matters, so put sleep first by joining our 6-week email programme. From creating your perfect sleep sanctuary to setting a wind-down alarm, join today to find out how to make "goodnight" a great night. 1. Have good sleep routine (sleep hygiene) Having a regular routine helps to improve sleep. It's sometimes called sleep hygiene. A good sleep routine should include having a set time to start winding down – and a way to relax is important too. Going to bed and getting up at fixed times is another good sleep habit. Ideally, a sleep routine should be the same every day, including weekends. 2. Relax, unwind and try meditation to help you sleep Remember, your sleep routine starts before you get into bed, so build in time every evening to relax. Avoid electronic devices at least an hour before bed, as mobiles, tablets and computers all throw out blue light that stops sleep. Reading, listening to soft music or a podcast, or sleep meditation can all help if you have trouble sleeping. Try some guided meditation for sleep, like our Beditation relaxation video, or read about how meditation can help with sleep . Video: Beditation When you're ready to sleep listen to this audio-only video to help you to relax. 3. Try mindfulness for sleep Anxiety, worry and stress can affect how well we sleep. Luckily, there are things you can do daily to help manage your worries, like talking to someone you trust or writing in a notebook about your concerns. If you often lie awake worrying, set aside time before bed to make a to-do list for the next day – this can be a good way to put your mind at rest. Using techniques like reframing unhelpful thoughts might also help, which we cover in our self-help CBT techniques section along with other tips. 4. Create the right sleep environment It's generally easier to drop off when it's quiet, dark and cool – although the right sleep environment is personal, so try different things and see what works for you. Silence is golden when it comes to sleep for many of us, so wearing earplugs, putting your phone on silent (or out of the room entirely) can keep things quiet. Good curtains or blinds can help to keep a room dark and avoid unwanted lights by keeping clocks out of view and phones facing down. Make sure your room is the right temperature for you and well ventilated, as a cool room is usually better to sleep in than a hot or stuffy one. Some people also find it helps to play music for sleep, such as ambient sounds like rainfall, gentle music or white noise. 5. Do not force sleep If you're lying awake unable to sleep, do no not try to force it. If you're tired and enjoying the feeling of resting, then sleep may naturally take over. But if you cannot sleep, get up and sit in a comfy place and do something relaxing, like reading a book or listening to quiet music. Only go back to bed when you feel sleepier. 6. Improve sleep through diet and exercise A good diet and regular physical exercise can help us to relax and get better sleep. And the opposite is also true: an unhealthy diet and lack of exercise can stop us from sleeping well. Avoid eating large meals close to bedtime. Try to also ditch the bedtime caffeine (like coffee), alcohol or nicotine if you can, because these are stimulants that make us more alert. Stimulants are a common cause of sleep problems . The general advice is to avoid stimulants 1 to 2 hours before bed. Try it and see if things improve. Regular exercise helps with sleep, but avoid anything too energetic in the 90 minutes before bedtime if you find it stops you from sleeping. Find out more about the benefits of being active for your mental health . Support with insomnia The NHS website has advice on insomnia and details on some of the treatments available from a GP or pharmacist. NHS: Insomnia More advice to help you sleep How can meditation help with sleep? Coping with change and uncertainty Self-help CBT techniques Improve your wellbeing with the Healthy Choices Quiz Our free quiz on the Better Health website asks about sleep, mental health and other lifestyle areas. You'll get advice to help you make changes where they matter most. Support links Accessibility Contact us Cookies Privacy policy Site map Terms and conditions © Crown copyright 