 Major Depression - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to clinicaltrials.gov and nih.gov for up-to-date information on NIH research. In Crisis? Call or Text 988 Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses. Home | Help for Mental Illnesses --> Search the NIMH website: Search the NIMH Website Search the NIMH Website: --> Información en español Mental Health Information Get Involved Research Funding News & Events About Us Health Topics NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics. Statistics NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States. Brochures and Fact Sheets Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics. Help for Mental Illnesses If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member. Clinical Trials If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials. Stakeholder Engagement Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support. Connect with NIMH Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media. Digital Shareables Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics. Science Education Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health. Research Funded by NIMH NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives. Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH. Priority Research Areas Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term. Resources for Researchers Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community. Opportunities & Announcements Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities. Funding Strategy for Grants Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants. Application Process Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works. Managing Grants Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements. Clinical Research Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research. Training Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities. Small Business Research Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses. Quick Links Funding & Grant News Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH Science Updates List of NIMH science updates including press releases, research highlights, and institute announcements. Meetings and Events Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH. Multimedia NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events. Innovation Speaker Series An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery. About the Acting NIMH Director Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D. Advisory Boards and Groups Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute. Strategic Plan Learn more about NIMH's roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years. Offices and Divisions Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division. Budget Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications. Careers at NIMH Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH. Staff Directories Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff. History Explore key milestones, discoveries, and the impact of NIMH-funded studies on mental health. Getting to NIMH Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH. Quick Links Contribute to Mental Health Research Mental Health Information Mental Health Information Home Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Get Involved Get Involved Home Stakeholder Engagement Connect with NIMH Digital Shareables Science Education Research Research Home Research Funded by NIMH Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) Funding Funding Home Opportunities & Announcements Strategy for Research Grants Grant Writing & Approval Process Managing Grants Clinical Research Research Training and Career Development Opportunities Small Business Research News & Events News & Events Home Science Updates Meetings and Events Multimedia Social Media Email Updates Innovation Speaker Series About Us About Us Home About the Acting NIMH Director Advisory Boards and Groups Strategic Plan Offices and Divisions Budget Careers at NIMH Staff Directories History Getting to NIMH Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Home > Mental Health Information > Statistics > Major Depression Share Page Menu Definitions Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode Among Adults Major Depressive Episode with Impairment Among Adults Treatment of Major Depressive Episode Among Adults Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode Among Adolescents Major Depressive Episode with Impairment Among Adolescents Treatment of Major Depressive Episode Among Adolescents Data Sources Major Depression Definitions Major depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the United States. For some individuals, major depression can result in severe impairments that interfere with or limit one’s ability to carry out major life activities. Additional information can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Depression . The past year prevalence data presented here for major depressive episode are from the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). The NSDUH study definition of major depressive episode is based mainly on the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5): A period of at least two weeks when a person experienced a depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in daily activities, and had a majority of specified symptoms, such as problems with sleep, eating, energy, concentration, or self-worth. No exclusions were made for major depressive episode symptoms caused by medical illness, substance use disorders, or medication. Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode Among Adults Figure 1 shows the past year prevalence of major depressive episode among U.S. adults aged 18 or older in 2021. An estimated 21.0 million adults in the United States had at least one major depressive episode. This number represented 8.3% of all U.S. adults. The prevalence of major depressive episode was higher among adult females (10.3%) compared to males (6.2%). The prevalence of adults with a major depressive episode was highest among individuals aged 18-25 (18.6%). The prevalence of major depressive episode was highest among those who report having multiple (two or more) races (13.9%). Figure 1 Past Year Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode Among U.S. Adults (2021) Demographic Percent Overall 8.3 Sex Female 10.3 Male 6.2 Age 18-25 18.6 26-49 9.3 50+ 4.5 Race/Ethnicity Hispanic or Latino* 7.9 White 8.9 Black or African American 6.7 Asian 4.8 AI/AN 11.2 NH/OPI 5.1 2 or More 13.9 *Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race; all other racial/ethnic groups are non-Hispanic | AI/AN = American Indian / Alaskan Native | NH/OPI = Native Hawaiian / Other Pacific Islander. Major Depressive Episode with Impairment Among Adults In 2021, an estimated 14.5 million U.S. adults aged 18 or older had at least one major depressive episode with severe impairment in the past year. This number represented 5.7% of all U.S. adults. Treatment of Major Depressive Episode Among Adults In 2021, an estimated 61.0% U.S. adults aged 18 or older with major depressive episode received treatment in the past year. Among those individuals with major depressive episode with severe impairment, an estimated 74.8% received treatment in the past year. Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode Among Adolescents Figure 2 shows the past year prevalence of major depressive episode among U.S. adolescents in 2021. An estimated 5.0 million adolescents aged 12 to 17 in the United States had at least one major depressive episode. This number represented 20.1% of the U.S. population aged 12 to 17. The prevalence of major depressive episode was higher among adolescent females (29.2%) compared to males (11.5%). The prevalence of major depressive episode was highest among adolescents reporting two or more races (27.2%). Figure 2 Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race; all other racial/ethnic groups are non-Hispanic. Note: Estimates for Native Hawaiian / Other Pacific Islander and American Indian / Alaskan Native groups are not reported in the above figure due to low precision of data collection in 2021. Demographic Percent Overall 20.1 Sex Female 29.2 Male 11.5 Age 12-13 13.0 14-15 20.7 16-17 26.8 Race/Ethnicity Hispanic* 22.2 White 20.7 Black or African American 14.0 Asian 13.8 2 or more Races 27.2 *Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race; all other racial/ethnic groups are non-Hispanic. Note: Estimates for Native Hawaiian / Other Pacific Islander and American Indian / Alaskan Native groups are not reported in the above figure due to low precision of data collection in 2021. Major Depressive Episode with Impairment Among Adolescents In 2021, an estimated 3.7 million adolescents aged 12 to 17 in the United States had at least one major depressive episode with severe impairment in the past year. This number represented 14.7% of the U.S. population aged 12 to 17. Treatment of Major Depressive Episode Among Adolescents In 2021, an estimated 40.6% of U.S. adolescents with major depressive episode received treatment in the past year. Among adolescents with major depressive episode with severe impairment, an estimated 44.2% received treatment in the past year. Data Sources Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2022). Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP22-07-01-005, NSDUH Series H-57). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2021-nsduh-annual-national-report . Statistical Methods and Measurement Caveats Please see the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health Methodological Summary and Definitions report and the 2021 NSDUH Frequently Asked Questions page for information on how these data were collected and calculated. A few specific caveats are noted below. Diagnostic Assessment: For the NSDUH survey — no exclusions were made for major depressive episode symptoms caused by medical illness, substance use disorders, or medication. For the NSDUH survey, methodology developed prior to the 2013 publication of the current DSM-5 was used to facilitate year-to-year comparisons. The adult and adolescent questions were adapted from the depression module in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Revisions to the questions in the modules were made primarily to reduce their length and to modify the NCS-R questions, which are interviewer-administered, to the audio computer-assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) format used in NSDUH. In addition, some revisions, based on cognitive testing, were made to improve comprehension. Furthermore, even though titles similar to those used in the NCS-R were used for the NSDUH modules, the results of these items may not be directly comparable. This is mainly due to differing modes of administration in each survey (ACASI in NSDUH vs. computer-assisted personal interviewing in NCS-R), revisions to wording necessary to maintain the logical processes of the ACASI environment, and possible context effects resulting from deleting questions not explicitly pertinent to major depression. Some questions in the adult depression module differ slightly from questions in the adolescent depression module; as such, major depressive episode data for adults aged 18 or older should not be compared to or combined with major depressive episode data for youths aged 12 to 17. The Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS) was used to assess the impact of major depressive episode on a person’s life. The SDS is a brief self-report tool with ratings from 0 to 10 (with 10 being the highest) for the level of impairment caused by the disorder in each of four role domains: home management, work, close relationships with others, and social life. A rating of ≥7 in at least one domain is considered to be severe impairment. Respondents were excluded if SDS role impairment severity was unknown, or if particular activities listed in the SDS were not applicable. For SDS level of impairment, the role domains for adolescents aged 12 to 17 were slightly modified from those for adults to be made age appropriate. Population: The entirety of NSDUH respondents for the major depressive episode estimates is the civilian, non-institutionalized population aged 12-17 (adolescents) and 18 years old or older (adults) residing within the United States. The survey covers residents of households (persons living in houses/townhouses, apartments, condominiums; civilians living in housing on military bases, etc.) and persons in non-institutional group quarters (e.g., shelters, rooming/boarding houses, college dormitories, migratory workers' camps, and halfway houses). The survey does not cover persons who, for the entire year, had no fixed address (e.g., homeless and/or transient persons not in shelters); were on active military duty; or who resided in institutional group quarters (e.g., correctional facilities, nursing homes, mental institutions, long-term hospitals). Data regarding sex of the respondent was assessed using male and female categories only. Interview Response and Completion: In 2021, 54.1% of the selected NSDUH sample (participants ages 12+) did not complete the interview. Reasons for non-response to interviewing include: refusal to participate (27.6%); respondent unavailable or no one at home (23.6%); and other reasons such as physical/mental incompetence or language barriers (2.9%). Adults and adolescents with major depressive episode may disproportionately fall into these non-response categories. While NSDUH weighting includes non-response adjustments to reduce bias, these adjustments may not fully account for differential non-response by mental illness status. Data Suppression: For some groups, data are not reported due to low precision. Data may be suppressed in the above charts if the data do not meet acceptable ranges for prevalence estimates, standard error estimates, and sample size. Background on the 2021 NSDUH and the COVID-19 Pandemic: Due to COVID-19, data collection methods for the 2021 NSDUH differed from previous years. The 2021 NSDUH used multimode (both in-person and virtual) data collection procedures that were first implemented in the fourth quarter of the 2020 NSDUH. Overall, 54.6% of interviews were completed via the web, and 45.4% were completed in person. 2021 NSDUH estimates are not comparable with estimates from prior years given the use of multimode data collection procedures throughout the entire year and the rate of non-response, per SAMHSA methodological investigations . Estimates based on web interviews are different from estimates based on in-person interviews. The demographics (e.g., gender, race, education) of people responding to web interviews differed from people answering in-person. In-person respondents were also more likely to report use of certain substances and were more likely to report experiencing mental health issues. Last Updated: July 2023 Disclaimer We link to external websites for informational purposes only, but we do not endorse or guarantee their accuracy. Once you leave our site, you will be subject to the new website’s privacy policy. Read NIMH’s full external linking policy for more information. NIMH Resources Health Topics Brochures and Fact Sheets Contact Us Información en español Policies and Notices Privacy Policy Website Policies FOIA Accessibility HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Federal Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) NIH Virtual Tour U.S. Department of Health and Human Services USA.gov The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Top 