Autism Spectrum Disorder - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Skip to main content 

An official website of the United States government 

Here’s how you know 

Here’s how you know 

Official websites use .gov 
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. 

Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to clinicaltrials.gov and nih.gov for up-to-date information on NIH research. 

In Crisis? Call or Text 988 

Transforming the understanding 
and treatment of mental illnesses. 

Home | Help for Mental Illnesses 

Search the NIMH website: 

Información en español 

Mental Health Information 

Get Involved 

Research 

Funding 

News & Events 

About Us 

Health Topics 
NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics. 

Statistics 
NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States. 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 
Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics. 

Help for Mental Illnesses 
If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member. 

Clinical Trials 
If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials. 

Stakeholder Engagement 
Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support. 

Connect with NIMH 
Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media. 

Digital Shareables 
Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics. 

Science Education 
Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health. 

Research Funded by NIMH 
NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives. 

Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) 
The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH. 

Priority Research Areas 
Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term. 

Resources for Researchers 
Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community. 

Opportunities & Announcements 
Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities. 

Funding Strategy for Grants 
Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants. 

Application Process 
Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works. 

Managing Grants 
Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements. 

Clinical Research 
Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research. 

Training 
Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities. 

Small Business Research 
Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses. 

Quick Links 
Funding & Grant News 

Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH 

Science Updates 
List of NIMH science updates including press releases, research highlights, and institute announcements. 

Meetings and Events 
Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH. 

Multimedia 
NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events. 

Innovation Speaker Series 
An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery. 

About the Acting NIMH Director 
Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D. 

Advisory Boards and Groups 
Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute. 

Strategic Plan 
Learn more about NIMH's roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years. 

Offices and Divisions 
Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division. 

Budget 
Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications. 

Careers at NIMH 
Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH. 

Staff Directories 
Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff. 

History 
Explore key milestones, discoveries, and the impact of NIMH-funded studies on mental health. 

Getting to NIMH 
Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH. 

Quick Links 
Contribute to Mental Health Research 

Mental Health Information 
Mental Health Information Home 

Health Topics 

Statistics 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 

Help for Mental Illnesses 

Clinical Trials 

Get Involved 
Get Involved Home 

Stakeholder Engagement 

Connect with NIMH 

Digital Shareables 

Science Education 

Research 
Research Home 

Research Funded by NIMH 

Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) 

Funding 
Funding Home 

Opportunities & Announcements 

Strategy for Research Grants 

Grant Writing & Approval Process 

Managing Grants 

Clinical Research 

Research Training and Career Development Opportunities 

Small Business Research 

News & Events 
News & Events Home 

Science Updates 

Meetings and Events 

Multimedia 

Social Media 

Email Updates 

Innovation Speaker Series 

About Us 
About Us Home 

About the Acting NIMH Director 

Advisory Boards and Groups 

Strategic Plan 

Offices and Divisions 

Budget 

Careers at NIMH 

Staff Directories 

History 

Getting to NIMH 

Health Topics 

Statistics 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 

Help for Mental Illnesses 

Clinical Trials 

Home > Mental Health Information > Brochures and Fact Sheets > Autism Spectrum Disorder 

Share Page 

Menu 

What is autism spectrum disorder? 

What are the signs and symptoms of ASD? 

What causes ASD? 

How is ASD diagnosed? 

What treatments and services are available for ASD? 

Where can I learn more about ASD? 

What are clinical trials and why are they important? 

For more information 

Reprints 

Autism Spectrum Disorder 

Download PDF 

En español 

What is autism spectrum disorder? 
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that affects how people interact with others, communicate, learn, and behave. Although autism can be diagnosed at any age, it is described as a “developmental disorder” because symptoms generally appear in the first two years of life. 

According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) , a guide created by the American Psychiatric Association that health care providers use to diagnose mental disorders and developmental disorders, people with ASD often have: 

Difficulty with social communication and interaction with other people 

Restricted interests and repetitive behaviors 

Symptoms that affect their ability to function in school, work, and other areas of life 

Autism is known as a “spectrum” disorder because people with autism have a range of characteristics, needs, strengths, and challenges. 

People of all ages, races, ethnicities, sexes, and economic backgrounds can be diagnosed with ASD. Although ASD can be a lifelong disorder, treatments, services, and supports can improve a person’s health, well-being, and daily functioning. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that all children receive screening for autism. Caregivers should talk to their child’s health care provider about ASD screening or evaluation. 

What are the signs and symptoms of ASD? 
The list below gives some examples of different types of behaviors that are common among people diagnosed with ASD. Not all people with ASD will have all behaviors, but most will have several of the behaviors listed below. 

Social communication and social interaction behaviors may include: 

Making little or inconsistent eye contact 

Appearing not to look at or listen to people who are talking 

Infrequently sharing interest, emotion, or enjoyment of objects or activities (including infrequently pointing at or showing things to others) 

Not responding or being slow to respond to one’s name or other verbal bids for attention 

Having difficulties with the back and forth of conversation 

Often talking at length about a subject of interest without considering social cues or conversational give-and-take 

Displaying facial expressions, movements, and gestures that do not match what is being said 

Having an unusual tone of voice that may sound flat, lacking emotion or tonal variation 

Having trouble understanding another person’s point of view or being unable to predict or understand other people’s actions 

Difficulties adjusting behavior to different social situations 

Difficulties sharing in imaginative play or in making friends 

Restrictive/repetitive behaviors may include: 

Repeating certain behaviors or having unusual behaviors, such as repeating words or phrases (a behavior called echolalia) 

Having a lasting intense interest in specific topics, such as numbers, details, or facts 

Showing overly focused interests, such as with moving objects or with parts of objects 

Becoming upset by slight changes in a routine and having difficulty with transitions 

Autistic people often have sensory differences such as: 

Being more sensitive or less sensitive than other people to sensory input, such as light, sound, clothing, or temperature 

People with ASD also may experience sleep problems and irritability. 

People on the autism spectrum also may have many strengths, including: 

Being able to learn things in detail and remember information for long periods of time 

Being strong visual and auditory learners 

Excelling in math, science, music, or art 

What causes ASD? 
Researchers do not know the primary causes of ASD, but studies suggest that a person’s genes and aspects of their environment may affect development in ways that lead to ASD. Some factors that are associated with an increased likelihood of developing ASD include: 

Having a sibling with ASD 

Having older parents 

Having certain genetic conditions (such as Down syndrome or Fragile X syndrome) 

Having a very low birth weight 

Not everyone who has these factors will develop ASD. 

How is ASD diagnosed? 
Health care providers diagnose ASD by evaluating a person’s behavior and development. ASD can usually be reliably diagnosed by the age of 2. It is important to seek an evaluation as soon as possible. The earlier ASD is diagnosed, the sooner treatments and services can begin. 

Diagnosis in young children 
Diagnosis in young children is often a two-stage process. 

Stage 1: General developmental screening during well-child checkups 
Every child should receive well-child checkups with a pediatrician or an early childhood health care provider. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that all children receive screening for developmental delays at their 9-, 18-, and 24- or 30-month well-child visits, with specific autism screenings at the 18- and 24-month well-child visits. A child may receive additional screenings if they have an increased likelihood of developing ASD or developmental problems. 

Considering caregivers’ experiences and concerns is an important part of the screening process for young children. The health care provider may ask questions about the child’s behaviors and evaluate those answers together with information from ASD screening tools and clinical observations of the child. Learn more about ASD screening on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website . 

The health care provider may refer the child for additional evaluation if they show developmental differences in behavior or functioning during this screening process. 

Stage 2: Additional diagnostic evaluation 
It is important to accurately detect and diagnose children with ASD as early as possible, as this will shed light on their unique strengths and challenges. Early detection can also help caregivers determine which services, educational programs, and behavioral therapies are most likely to be helpful for their child. 

A team of health care providers who have experience diagnosing ASD will conduct the diagnostic evaluation. This team may include child neurologists, developmental behavioral pediatricians, speech-language pathologists, child psychologists and psychiatrists, educational specialists, and occupational therapists. 

The diagnostic evaluation is likely to include: 

Medical and neurological examinations 

Assessment of the child’s cognitive abilities 

Assessment of the child’s speech and language abilities 

Observation of the child’s behavior 

An in-depth conversation with the child’s caregivers about the child’s behavior and development 

Assessment of age-appropriate skills needed to complete daily activities independently, such as eating, dressing, and toileting 

Questions about the child’s family history 

Because ASD is a complex disorder that sometimes occurs with other conditions or learning disorders, the comprehensive evaluation may include blood tests and a hearing test. 

The outcome of this evaluation may result in a formal diagnosis and recommendations for treatment. 

Diagnosis in older children and adolescents 
Caregivers and teachers are often the first to recognize ASD symptoms in older children and adolescents. The school’s special education team may perform an initial evaluation and then recommend that a child receive additional evaluation from their primary health care provider or a health care provider who specializes in ASD. 

A child’s caregivers may talk with these health care providers about the child’s social difficulties, including problems with subtle communication. These subtle communication differences may include problems understanding tone of voice, facial expressions, or body language. Older children and adolescents may have trouble understanding figures of speech, humor, or sarcasm. They also may have challenges forming friendships with peers. 

It is also important for the health care provider to learn about the child’s strengths so they can tailor their recommendations for services and supports. 

Diagnosis in adults 
Diagnosing ASD in adults is often more difficult than diagnosing ASD in children. In adults, some ASD symptoms can overlap with symptoms of mental disorders such as an anxiety disorder or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 

Adults who have questions about whether they may be on the autism spectrum should talk with a health care provider and ask for a referral for an ASD evaluation. Although evaluation for ASD in adults is still being refined, adults can be referred to a neuropsychologist, psychologist, or psychiatrist who has experience with ASD. The expert will ask about: 

Social interaction and communication challenges 

Sensory issues 

Repetitive behaviors 

Restricted interests 

The evaluation may also include a conversation with caregivers and family members to learn about the person’s early developmental history, which can help ensure an accurate diagnosis. 

Obtaining a correct diagnosis of ASD as an adult can help people understand past challenges, identify personal strengths, and find the right kind of help. Studies are underway to determine the types of services and supports that are most helpful for autistic transition-age youth and adults. 

What treatments and services are available for ASD? 
Interventions, services, and supports for ASD are most effective when they begin as soon as possible after diagnosis. Receiving appropriate care and services can help address a person’s specific needs and challenges while also helping them learn new skills and build on their strengths. 

People with ASD have a wide range of issues and needs, which means there is no single best approach. Working closely with health care and service providers is an important part of finding the right combination of interventions, services, and supports. 

Interventions and Services 
People with ASD may be referred to health care and service providers who specialize in various intervention approaches, including behavioral, psychological, educational, occupational, physical, or speech-language therapy. These interventions and services are often highly structured and intensive and may involve caregivers, siblings, and other family members. These programs may help people: 

Learn social, communication, and language skills 

Manage behaviors that interfere with daily functioning and well-being 

Increase or build on strengths 

Learn life skills for living independently 

Find housing, educational supports, and job coaching or training 

Medication 
A health care provider may prescribe medication to treat specific symptoms, including: 

Aggression 

Anxiety and depression 

Attention 

Hyperactivity 

Irritability 

Repetitive behavior 

Self-injurious behavior 

Read the most up-to-date information on medication, side effects, and warnings on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website . 

Finding services, programs, and resources 
Many services, programs, and other resources are available to help people with autism and their families. Here are some tips for finding these additional resources: 

Contact a health care provider, local health department, school, community center, or autism advocacy group to learn about special programs or local resources. 

Find an autism support group. Sharing information and experiences can help people with autism and their caregivers learn about treatment options and autism-related programs. 

Keep records of your conversations and meetings with health care providers and teachers. This information helps when it is time to decide which programs and services are appropriate. 

Keep copies of health care reports and evaluations. This information may help people with autism qualify for special programs. 

Where can I learn more about ASD? 
For more information about ASD, visit: 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 

Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee 

National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders 

What are clinical trials and why are they important? 
Clinical trials are research studies that look at ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. These studies help show whether a treatment is safe and effective in people. Some people join clinical trials to help doctors and researchers learn more about a disease and improve health care. Other people, such as those with health conditions, join to try treatments that aren’t widely available. 

NIMH supports clinical trials across the United States. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials and whether one is right for you. Learn more about participating in clinical trials . 

For more information 
Learn more about mental health disorders and topics . For information about various health topics, visit the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus resource. 

Reprints 
The information in this publication is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please cite the National Institute of Mental Health as the source. Read our copyright policy to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content. 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
National Institutes of Health 
NIH Publication No. 25-MH-8084 
Revised 2025 

Disclaimer 
We link to external websites for informational purposes only, but we do not endorse or guarantee their accuracy. Once you leave our site, you will be subject to the new website’s privacy policy. Read NIMH’s full external linking policy for more information. 

NIMH Resources 
Health Topics 
Brochures and Fact Sheets 
Contact Us 
Información en español 

Policies and Notices 
Privacy Policy 
Website Policies 
FOIA 
Accessibility 
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

Federal Resources 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
NIH Virtual Tour 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
USA.gov 

The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Top