Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Skip to main content 

An official website of the United States government 

Here’s how you know 

Here’s how you know 

Official websites use .gov 
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. 

Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to clinicaltrials.gov and nih.gov for up-to-date information on NIH research. 

In Crisis? Call or Text 988 

Transforming the understanding 
and treatment of mental illnesses. 

Home | Help for Mental Illnesses 

Search the NIMH website: 

Información en español 

Mental Health Information 

Get Involved 

Research 

Funding 

News & Events 

About Us 

Health Topics 
NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics. 

Statistics 
NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States. 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 
Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics. 

Help for Mental Illnesses 
If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member. 

Clinical Trials 
If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials. 

Stakeholder Engagement 
Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support. 

Connect with NIMH 
Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media. 

Digital Shareables 
Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics. 

Science Education 
Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health. 

Research Funded by NIMH 
NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives. 

Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) 
The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH. 

Priority Research Areas 
Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term. 

Resources for Researchers 
Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community. 

Opportunities & Announcements 
Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities. 

Funding Strategy for Grants 
Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants. 

Application Process 
Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works. 

Managing Grants 
Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements. 

Clinical Research 
Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research. 

Training 
Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities. 

Small Business Research 
Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses. 

Quick Links 
Funding & Grant News 

Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH 

Science Updates 
List of NIMH science updates including press releases, research highlights, and institute announcements. 

Meetings and Events 
Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH. 

Multimedia 
NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events. 

Innovation Speaker Series 
An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery. 

About the Acting NIMH Director 
Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D. 

Advisory Boards and Groups 
Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute. 

Strategic Plan 
Learn more about NIMH's roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years. 

Offices and Divisions 
Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division. 

Budget 
Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications. 

Careers at NIMH 
Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH. 

Staff Directories 
Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff. 

History 
Explore key milestones, discoveries, and the impact of NIMH-funded studies on mental health. 

Getting to NIMH 
Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH. 

Quick Links 
Contribute to Mental Health Research 

Mental Health Information 
Mental Health Information Home 

Health Topics 

Statistics 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 

Help for Mental Illnesses 

Clinical Trials 

Get Involved 
Get Involved Home 

Stakeholder Engagement 

Connect with NIMH 

Digital Shareables 

Science Education 

Research 
Research Home 

Research Funded by NIMH 

Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) 

Funding 
Funding Home 

Opportunities & Announcements 

Strategy for Research Grants 

Grant Writing & Approval Process 

Managing Grants 

Clinical Research 

Research Training and Career Development Opportunities 

Small Business Research 

News & Events 
News & Events Home 

Science Updates 

Meetings and Events 

Multimedia 

Social Media 

Email Updates 

Innovation Speaker Series 

About Us 
About Us Home 

About the Acting NIMH Director 

Advisory Boards and Groups 

Strategic Plan 

Offices and Divisions 

Budget 

Careers at NIMH 

Staff Directories 

History 

Getting to NIMH 

Health Topics 

Statistics 

Brochures and Fact Sheets 

Help for Mental Illnesses 

Clinical Trials 

Home > Mental Health Information > Brochures and Fact Sheets > Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 

Share Page 

Menu 

What is post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD? 

Who develops PTSD? 

What are the symptoms of PTSD? 

How do children and teens react to trauma? 

Why do some people develop PTSD and other people do not? 

How is PTSD treated? 

How can I find help? 

What can I do to help myself? 

How can I help a loved one with PTSD? 

Where can I find more information on PTSD? 

Are there clinical trials studying PTSD? 

Reprints 

For more information 

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 

Download PDF 

En español 

What is post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD? 
It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear is a part of the body’s “fight-or-flight” response, which helps us avoid or respond to potential danger. People may experience a range of reactions after trauma, and most will recover from their symptoms over time. Those who continue to experience symptoms may be diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 

Who develops PTSD? 
Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes combat veterans and people who have experienced or witnessed a physical or sexual assault, abuse, an accident, a disaster, a terror attack, or other serious events. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened, even when they are no longer in danger. 

Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Sometimes, learning that a relative or close friend experienced trauma can cause PTSD. 

About 6 of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lifetime, according to the National Center for PTSD, a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs program. Women are more likely than men to develop PTSD. Certain aspects of the traumatic event and biological factors (such as genes) may make some people more likely to develop PTSD. 

What are the symptoms of PTSD? 
Symptoms of PTSD usually begin within 3 months of the traumatic event, but they sometimes emerge later. To meet the criteria for PTSD, a person must have symptoms for longer than 1 month, and the symptoms must be severe enough to interfere with aspects of daily life, such as relationships or work. The symptoms also must be unrelated to medication, substance use, or other illness. 

The course of the disorder varies. Although some people recover within 6 months, others have symptoms that last for 1 year or longer. People with PTSD often have co-occurring conditions, such as depression, substance use, or one or more anxiety disorders. 

After a dangerous event, it is natural to have some symptoms. For example, some people may feel detached from the experience, as though they are observing things as an outsider rather than experiencing them. A mental health professional—such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, or clinical social worker—can determine whether symptoms meet the criteria for PTSD. 

To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month: 

At least one re-experiencing symptom 

At least one avoidance symptom 

At least two arousal and reactivity symptoms 

At least two cognition and mood symptoms 

Re-experiencing symptoms 
Flashbacks—reliving the traumatic event, including physical symptoms, such as a racing heart or sweating 

Recurring memories or dreams related to the event 

Distressing thoughts 

Physical signs of stress 

Thoughts and feelings can trigger these symptoms, as can words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event. 

Avoidance symptoms 
Staying away from places, events, or objects that are reminders of the experience 

Avoiding thoughts or feelings related to the traumatic event 

Avoidance symptoms may cause people to change their routines. For example, some people may avoid driving or riding in a car after a serious car accident. 

Arousal and reactivity symptoms 
Being easily startled 

Feeling tense, on guard, or on edge 

Having difficulty concentrating 

Having difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep 

Feeling irritable and having angry or aggressive outbursts 

Engaging in risky, reckless, or destructive behavior 

Arousal symptoms are often constant. They can lead to feelings of stress and anger and may interfere with parts of daily life, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating. 

Cognition and mood symptoms 
Trouble remembering key features of the traumatic event 

Negative thoughts about oneself or the world 

Exaggerated feelings of blame directed toward oneself or others 

Ongoing negative emotions, such as fear, anger, guilt, or shame 

Loss of interest in previous activities 

Feelings of social isolation 

Difficulty feeling positive emotions, such as happiness or satisfaction 

Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event. They can lead people to feel detached from friends or family members. 

How do children and teens react to trauma? 
Children and teens can have extreme reactions to traumatic events, but their symptoms may not be the same as those seen in adults. In children younger than age 6, symptoms can include: 

Wetting the bed after having learned to use the toilet 

Forgetting how to talk or being unable to talk 

Acting out the scary event during playtime 

Being unusually clingy with a parent or other adult 

Older children and teens usually show symptoms more like those seen in adults. They also may develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilt over not preventing injury or death, or have thoughts of revenge. 

Find more information on helping children and adolescents cope with traumatic events . 

Why do some people develop PTSD and other people do not? 
Not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD—many factors play a part. Some of these factors are present before the trauma; others play a role during and after a traumatic event. 

Risk factors that may increase the likelihood of developing PTSD include: 

Exposure to previous traumatic experiences, particularly during childhood 

Getting hurt or seeing people hurt or killed 

Feeling horror, helplessness, or extreme fear 

Having little or no social support after the event 

Dealing with stressors after the event, such as the loss of a loved one, pain and injury, or loss of a job or home 

Having a personal history or family history of mental illness or substance use 

Resilience factors that may reduce the likelihood of developing PTSD include: 

Seeking out and receiving support from friends, family, or support groups 

Learning to feel okay with one’s actions in response to a traumatic event 

Having a coping strategy for getting through and learning from a traumatic event 

Being prepared and able to respond to upsetting events as they occur, despite feeling fear 

How is PTSD treated? 
It is important for people with PTSD symptoms to work with a mental health professional who has experience treating PTSD. The main treatments are psychotherapy, medications, or a combination of psychotherapy and medications. An experienced mental health professional can help people find the best treatment plan for their symptoms and needs. 

Some people with PTSD, such as those in abusive relationships, may be living through ongoing trauma. In these cases, treatment is usually most effective when it addresses both the traumatic situation and the symptoms of PTSD. People who experience traumatic events or who have PTSD may also experience panic disorder, depression, substance use, or suicidal thoughts. Treatment for these conditions can help with recovery after trauma. Research shows that support from family and friends also can be an essential part of recovery. 

Find tips to help prepare and guide you in talking to your health care provider about your mental health . 

Psychotherapy 
Psychotherapy, sometimes called talk therapy, includes a variety of treatment techniques that mental health professionals use to help people identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can provide support, education, and guidance to people with PTSD and their families. Treatment can take place one on one or in a group setting and usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks but can last longer. 

Some types of psychotherapy target PTSD symptoms, while others focus on social, family, or job-related problems. Effective psychotherapies often emphasize a few key components, including learning skills to help identify triggers and manage symptoms. 

A common type of psychotherapy called cognitive behavioral therapy can include exposure therapy and cognitive restructuring. 

Exposure therapy helps people learn to manage their fear by gradually exposing them, in a safe way, to the trauma they experienced. As part of exposure therapy, people may think or write about the trauma or visit the place where it happened. This therapy can help people with PTSD reduce symptoms that cause them distress. 

Cognitive restructuring helps people make sense of the traumatic event. Sometimes people remember the event differently from how it happened, or they may feel guilt or shame about something that is not their fault. Cognitive restructuring can help people with PTSD think about what happened in a realistic way. 

Learn more about psychotherapy . 

Medications 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved two selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), a type of antidepressant medication, for the treatment of PTSD. SSRIs may help people manage PTSD symptoms, such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling emotionally numb. Health care providers may prescribe SSRIs and other medications along with psychotherapy. Some medications may help treat specific PTSD symptoms, such as sleep problems and nightmares. 

People should work with their health care providers to find the best medication or combination of medications and the right dose. Read the latest medication warnings, patient medication guides, and information on newly approved medications on the FDA website . 

How can I find help? 
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration has an online treatment locator at to help you find mental health services in your area. Learn more about getting help on the NIMH website. 

If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911 . 

What can I do to help myself? 
You can get better with treatment. Here are some things you can do to help yourself: 

Talk with your health care provider about treatment options and follow your treatment plan. 

Engage in exercise, mindfulness, or other activities that help reduce stress. 

Try to maintain routines for meals, exercise, and sleep. 

Set realistic goals and focus on what you can manage. 

Spend time with trusted friends or relatives and tell them about things that may trigger symptoms. 

Expect your symptoms to improve gradually, not immediately. 

Avoid the use of alcohol or drugs. 

How can I help a loved one with PTSD? 
If you know someone who may be experiencing PTSD, the most important thing you can do is to help that person get the right diagnosis and treatment. Some people may need help making an appointment with their health care provider; others may benefit from having someone accompany them to their health care visits. 

If a close friend or relative is diagnosed with PTSD, you can encourage them to follow their treatment plan. If their symptoms do not improve after 6 to 8 weeks, you can encourage them to talk about it with their health care provider. You also can: 

Offer emotional support, understanding, patience, and encouragement. 

Learn about PTSD so you can understand what your friend is experiencing. 

Listen carefully. Pay attention to the person’s feelings and the situations that may trigger PTSD symptoms. 

Share positive distractions, such as walks, outings, and other activities. 

Where can I find more information on PTSD? 
The National Center for PTSD, a program of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, is the leading federal center for research and education on PTSD and traumatic stress. You can find information about PTSD, treatment options, getting help, and additional resources for families, friends, and providers on the center’s website . 

Are there clinical trials studying PTSD? 
NIMH supports a wide range of research, including clinical trials that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions—including PTSD. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. 

Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct clinical trials with patients and healthy volunteers. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about participating in clinical trials . 

Reprints 
The information in this publication is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please cite the National Institute of Mental Health as the source. Read our copyright policy to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content. 

For more information 
MedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine) ( en español ) 

ClinicalTrials.gov ( en español ) 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
National Institutes of Health 
NIH Publication No. 23-MH-8124 
Revised 2023 

Disclaimer 
We link to external websites for informational purposes only, but we do not endorse or guarantee their accuracy. Once you leave our site, you will be subject to the new website’s privacy policy. Read NIMH’s full external linking policy for more information. 

NIMH Resources 
Health Topics 
Brochures and Fact Sheets 
Contact Us 
Información en español 

Policies and Notices 
Privacy Policy 
Website Policies 
FOIA 
Accessibility 
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

Federal Resources 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
NIH Virtual Tour 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
USA.gov 

The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Top