 Any Anxiety Disorder - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to clinicaltrials.gov and nih.gov for up-to-date information on NIH research. In Crisis? Call or Text 988 Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses. Home | Help for Mental Illnesses --> Search the NIMH website: Search the NIMH Website Search the NIMH Website: --> Información en español Mental Health Information Get Involved Research Funding News & Events About Us Health Topics NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics. Statistics NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States. Brochures and Fact Sheets Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics. Help for Mental Illnesses If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member. Clinical Trials If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials. Stakeholder Engagement Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support. Connect with NIMH Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media. Digital Shareables Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics. Science Education Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health. Research Funded by NIMH NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives. Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH. Priority Research Areas Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term. Resources for Researchers Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community. Opportunities & Announcements Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities. Funding Strategy for Grants Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants. Application Process Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works. Managing Grants Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements. Clinical Research Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research. Training Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities. Small Business Research Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses. Quick Links Funding & Grant News Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH Science Updates List of NIMH science updates including press releases, research highlights, and institute announcements. Meetings and Events Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH. Multimedia NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events. Innovation Speaker Series An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery. About the Acting NIMH Director Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D. Advisory Boards and Groups Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute. Strategic Plan Learn more about NIMH's roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years. Offices and Divisions Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division. Budget Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications. Careers at NIMH Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH. Staff Directories Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff. History Explore key milestones, discoveries, and the impact of NIMH-funded studies on mental health. Getting to NIMH Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH. Quick Links Contribute to Mental Health Research Mental Health Information Mental Health Information Home Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Get Involved Get Involved Home Stakeholder Engagement Connect with NIMH Digital Shareables Science Education Research Research Home Research Funded by NIMH Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) Funding Funding Home Opportunities & Announcements Strategy for Research Grants Grant Writing & Approval Process Managing Grants Clinical Research Research Training and Career Development Opportunities Small Business Research News & Events News & Events Home Science Updates Meetings and Events Multimedia Social Media Email Updates Innovation Speaker Series About Us About Us Home About the Acting NIMH Director Advisory Boards and Groups Strategic Plan Offices and Divisions Budget Careers at NIMH Staff Directories History Getting to NIMH Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Home > Mental Health Information > Statistics > Any Anxiety Disorder Share Page Menu Definitions Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among Adults Any Anxiety Disorder with Impairment Among Adults Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among Adolescents Data Sources Any Anxiety Disorder Definitions The wide variety of anxiety disorders differ by the objects or situations that induce them, but share features of excessive anxiety and related behavioral disturbances. Anxiety disorders can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships. For the data presented on this page, any anxiety disorders included panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, specific phobia, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), post-traumatic stress disorder , obsessive-compulsive disorder , and separation anxiety disorder. Additional information about anxiety disorders can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Anxiety Disorders . Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among Adults Based on diagnostic interview data from the National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R), Figure 1 shows past year prevalence of any anxiety disorder among U.S. adults aged 18 or older. 1 An estimated 19.1% of U.S. adults had any anxiety disorder in the past year. Past year prevalence of any anxiety disorder was higher for females (23.4%) than for males (14.3%). An estimated 31.1% of U.S. adults experience any anxiety disorder at some time in their lives. 2 Figure 1 Past Year Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among U.S Adults (2001-2003) Demographic Percent Overall 19.1 Sex Female 23.4 Male 14.3 Age 18-29 22.3 30-44 22.7 45-59 20.6 60+ 9.0 Any Anxiety Disorder with Impairment Among Adults Of adults with any anxiety disorder in the past year, degree of impairment ranged from mild to severe, as shown in Figure 2. Impairment was determined by scores on the Sheehan Disability Scale. Among adults with any anxiety disorder, an estimated 22.8% had serious impairment, and 33.7% had moderate impairment. 1 A majority of people with any anxiety disorder experienced mild impairment (43.5%). 1 Figure 2 Past Year Severity of Any Anxiety Disorder Among U.S. Adults (2001-2003) Severity Percent Mild 43.5 Moderate 33.7 Serious 22.8 Total 100 Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among Adolescents Based on diagnostic interview data from National Comorbidity Survey Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A), Figure 3 shows lifetime prevalence of any anxiety disorder among U.S. adolescents aged 13-18. 4 An estimated 31.9% of adolescents had any anxiety disorder. Of adolescents with any anxiety disorder, an estimated 8.3% had severe impairment. DSM-IV criteria were used to determine impairment. The prevalence of any anxiety disorder among adolescents was higher for females (38.0%) than for males (26.1%). The prevalence of any anxiety disorder was similar across age groups. Figure 3 Lifetime Prevalence of Any Anxiety Disorder Among Adolescents (2001-2004) Demographic Percent Overall 31.9 With Severe Impairment 8.3 Sex Female 38.0 Male 26.1 Age 13-14 31.4 15-16 32.1 17-18 32.3 Data Sources References Harvard Medical School, 2007. National Comorbidity Survey (NCS). (2017, August 21). Retrieved from https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php . Data Table 2: 12-month prevalence DSM-IV/WMH-CIDI disorders by sex and cohort. Harvard Medical School, 2007. National Comorbidity Survey (NCS). (2017, August 21). Retrieved from https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php . Data Table 1: Lifetime prevalence DSM-IV/WMH-CIDI disorders by sex and cohort . Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Demler O, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005 Jun;62(6):617-27. PMID: 15939839 Merikangas KR, He JP, Burstein M, Swanson SA, Avenevoli S, Cui L, Benjet C, Georgiades K, Swendsen J. Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication--Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Oct;49(10):980-9. PMID: 20855043 Statistical Methods and Measurement Caveats National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) Diagnostic Assessment and Population: The NCS-R is a nationally representative, face-to-face, household survey conducted between February 2001 and April 2003 with a response rate of 70.9%. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) mental disorders were assessed using a modified version of the fully structured World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview (WMH-CIDI), a fully structured lay-administered diagnostic interview that generates both International Classification of Diseases, 10 th Revision, and DSM-IV diagnoses. The DSM-IV criteria were used here. The Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS) assessed disability in work role performance, household maintenance, social life, and intimate relationships on a 0–10 scale. Participants for the main interview totaled 9,282 English-speaking, non-institutionalized, civilian respondents. Any anxiety disorder was assessed in a subsample of 5,692 adults. The NCS-R was led by Harvard University. Unlike the DSM-IV criteria used in the NCS-R and NCS-A, the current DSM-5 no longer places post-traumatic stress disorder or obsessive compulsive disorder in the anxiety disorder category. They are listed in new DSM5 categories. Survey Non-response: In 2001-2002, non-response was 29.1% of primary respondents and 19.6% of secondary respondents. Reasons for non-response to interviewing include: refusal to participate (7.3% of primary, 6.3% of secondary); respondent was reluctant- too busy but did not refuse (17.7% of primary, 11.6% of secondary); circumstantial, such as intellectual developmental disability or overseas work assignment (2.0% of primary, 1.7% of secondary); and household units that were never contacted (2.0). For more information, see PMID: 15297905 . National Comorbidity Survey Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A) Diagnostic Assessment and Population: The NCS-A was carried out under a cooperative agreement sponsored by NIMH to meet a request from Congress to provide national data on the prevalence and correlates of mental disorders among U.S. youth. The NCS-A was a nationally representative, face-to-face survey of 10,123 adolescents aged 13 to 18 years in the continental United States. The survey was based on a dual-frame design that included 904 adolescent residents of the households that participated in the adult U.S. National Comorbidity Survey Replication and 9,244 adolescent students selected from a nationally representative sample of 320 schools. The survey was fielded between February 2001 and January 2004. DSM-IV mental disorders were assessed using a modified version of the fully structured World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Survey Non-response: The overall adolescent non-response rate was 24.4%. This is made up of non-response rates of 14.1% in the household sample, 18.2% in the un-blinded school sample, and 77.7% in the blinded school sample. Non-response was largely due to refusal (21.3%), which in the household and un-blinded school samples came largely from parents rather than adolescents (72.3% and 81.0%, respectively). The refusals in the blinded school sample, in comparison, came almost entirely (98.1%) from parents failing to return the signed consent postcard. For more information, see PMID: 19507169 . Disclaimer We link to external websites for informational purposes only, but we do not endorse or guarantee their accuracy. Once you leave our site, you will be subject to the new website’s privacy policy. Read NIMH’s full external linking policy for more information. NIMH Resources Health Topics Brochures and Fact Sheets Contact Us Información en español Policies and Notices Privacy Policy Website Policies FOIA Accessibility HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Federal Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) NIH Virtual Tour U.S. Department of Health and Human Services USA.gov The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Top 