 Suicide and PTSD - PTSD: National Center for PTSD skip to page content Attention A T users. To access the menus on this page please perform the following steps. 1. Please switch auto forms mode to off. 2. Hit enter to expand a main menu option (Health, Benefits, etc). 3. To enter and activate the submenu links, hit the down arrow. You will now be able to tab or arrow up or down through the submenu options to access/activate the submenu links. Get help from Veterans Crisis Line Locator Contact Search Contact Us FAQs Ask a Question Toll Free Numbers Locator Hospitals and Clinics Vet Centers Regional Benefits Offices Regional Loan Centers Cemetery Locations Get help from Veterans Crisis Line Search Enter your search text Button to start search site map [a-z] More VA More VA Health Health Care Information A-Z Health Topic Finder My Health e Vet Prescriptions Refills Schedule a VA Appointment Veterans Crisis Line Mental Health PTSD Public Health Community Care Caregiver Support Urgent Care Benefits General Benefits Information Disability Compensation Pension GI Bill ® Vocational Rehabilitation & Employment Dependents' Educational Assistance Survivor Benefits Home Loans Life Insurance Appeals Modernization Burials & Memorials National Cemetery Information Burial and Memorial Benefits Headstones Markers & Medallions --> Presidential Memorial Certificates --> Find a Cemetery Locate a Grave Burial Flags --> Burial Allowance --> Apply for Pre-need Eligibility Schedule a Burial Cemetery Grants Cemetery Restoration Veterans Legacy Memorial NCA History Program Veterans Legacy Program About VA Inside VA Secretary of VA Executive Biographies Organizations History Budget and Performance VA Plans, Budget, & Performance Agency Financial Report (AFR) Budget Submission Recovery Act Resources Business Congressional Affairs Jobs Benefits Booklet Data & Statistics VA Open Data VA App Store National Resource Directory Veteran Service Organizations Office of Accountability & Whistleblower Protection Transparency Media Room Inside the Media Room Public Affairs News Releases Speeches Videos Publications National Observances Veterans Day Memorial Day Celebrating America's Freedoms Special Events Adaptive Sports Program Creative Arts Festival Golden Age Games Summer Sports Clinic Training - Exposure - Experience (TEE) Tournament Wheelchair Games Winter Sports Clinic Locations Hospitals & Clinics Vet Centers Regional Benefits Offices Regional Loan Centers Cemetery Locations Contact Us FAQs Ask a Question Toll Free Numbers VA » Health Care » PTSD: National Center for PTSD » Understand » Related Problems » Suicide and PTSD PTSD: National Center for PTSD Menu Menu PTSD PTSD Home Understand PTSD What is PTSD? PTSD Basics More PTSD Topics Types of Trauma War and Combat Violence and Abuse Disaster Events Is it PTSD? How PTSD is Assessed Common Reactions Do I have PTSD? How Common is PTSD? Adults Veterans Children and Teens Related Problems Anger Depression Traumatic Brain Injury Chronic Pain Sleep Problems Alcohol & Substances Suicide Grief More Related Problems PTSD Awareness Understand PTSD Treatment Treatment Basics Talk Therapy Medications Get Help Get Help in a Crisis Find a Provider Help for Veterans Self-Help and Coping For Families and Friends Effects of PTSD How Can I Help? How Do I Get Support? For Providers Assessment Overview Adult Interviews Adult Self-Report Child Measures Deployment Measures PTSD Screens Functioning and Other Outcomes Trauma and Stressor Exposure Measures Assessment Request List of All Measures Trauma, PTSD and Treatment PTSD Essentials Treatment Essentials Types of Trauma Specific Populations Co-Occurring Conditions Trauma-informed Care Continuing Education Consultation Program Home Learn How It Works Find Resources Explore Our Lectures Tech into Care Patient Education Disaster Events For Everyone For Providers and Responders For Employers and Community Leaders Apps, Videos and More Mobile Apps Videos PTSD Treatment Decision Aid AboutFace Online Programs PTSDpubs PTSD Repository Our Publications Electronic Publications Print Materials Articles by Center Staff En Español Comprendiendo el TEPT Tratamiento de TEPT Obtenga Ayuda Familias y Amigos Recursos About Us Our Work Mission and Overview Operational Priorities Research Initiatives Education Initiatives Annual Reports History of the Center Divisions and Staff Leadership Executive Behavioral Science Clinical Neurosciences Dissemination & Training Evaluation Women's Health Sciences Careers Media Inquiries Site Map More Health Care Veterans Health Administration Health Benefits Health Benefits Home Apply for VA Care Apply Online Veteran Eligibility Active Duty Families of Veterans Women Veterans Determine Costs Copays Means Test Health Insurance Make a Payment Community Care Community Care Home For Veterans For Providers Forms & Publications Affordable Care Act Overview Veterans Enrolled in VA Health Care Veterans Not Enrolled in VA Health Care Family Members Frequently Asked Questions Schedule a VA Appointment Caregiver Support Urgent Care Conditions & Treatments See All Conditions & Treatments (A-Z) Hepatitis HIV Mental Health Mental Health Home Suicide Prevention Substance Abuse Military Sexual Trauma PTSD Research (MIRECC) Military Exposures Polytrauma Rehabilitation Spinal Cord Injury Telehealth Womens Health Issues Wellness Programs MyHealtheVet Nutrition Quitting Smoking Vaccines & Immunizations Flu Vaccination Prevention / Wellness Public Health Weight Management (MOVE!) Whole Health Program Locations Hospitals & Clinics Vet Centers Veterans Canteen Service (VCS) Research Research Home About VA Research Services Programs News, Events and Media Research Topics For Veterans For Researchers Research Oversight Special Groups Caregivers Combat Veterans & their Families Readjustment Counseling (Vet Centers) War Related Illness & Injury Study Center Homeless Veterans Returning Service Members Rural Veterans Seniors & Aging Veterans Volunteers Women Veterans Careers, Job Help & Training Find a Job with VA Health Care Jobs (VA Careers) Travel Nurses Get Job Help Vets in the Workplace VA for Vets Performance Based Interviewing Clinical Trainees (Academic Affiliations) Employees & Contractors Talent Management System (TMS) VA Learning University (VALU) SimLearn Libraries (VALNET) VA Software Documentation Library (VDL) About VHA Learn about VHA Forms & Publications Quality & Safety Access and Quality Data Ethics VA/DOD Clinical Practice Guidelines Medical Inspector Patient Safety Organizations Administrative Clinical Quick Links Enter ZIP code here Enter ZIP code here Suicide and PTSD Suicide and PTSD Available en Español Trauma, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and suicide are related. Learning about these relationships may help you understand more about suicide and what to do if you or someone you know needs help. And, if you have PTSD, treatment can help. Reading time: minutes For Immediate Help, Call or Text 24/7 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline : Call or text 988 Veterans Crisis Line: Call 988 then press 1 or text 838255. If you are a Veteran with hearing loss, dial TTY 711, then 988. If you are a Veteran calling from overseas, find phone and text numbers in the footer of the Veterans Crisis Line website. Online chat is available on both the 988 Lifeline and Veterans Crisis Line. How common is suicide? It can be difficult to know exactly how many suicides occur each year. Suicides may not be reported as such. It can be hard to know whether or not a person meant to die by suicide. For a death to be recorded as suicide, examiners must be able to say that the deceased meant to die. The way deaths are recorded (in general) has changed over time. The 2025 National Veteran Suicide Prevention Annual Report includes the following data about suicide in general, and among Veterans: In 2023, among all U.S. adults, 47,711 died by suicide. This is an average of about 131 adults per day. This includes 6,398 Veterans who died by suicide in the same year, an average of about 17 or 18 Veterans per day. Men are more likely to die by suicide, and this is true for the general population as well as among Veterans. Young adults, ages 18-34, are more likely to die by suicide than older adults, regardless of sex or Veteran status. Does trauma increase a person's risk for suicide? There is no single cause for death by suicide. Going through a trauma may increase a person's suicide risk. And particular types of trauma may increase risk. For example, among Veterans, some studies have found that combat trauma is related to suicide, while other studies have not found this pattern. It is possible that suicide risk in Veterans may be affected by the intensity and frequence of the combat trauma. Data from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) shows that among Veterans getting care in VHA, those who have experienced military sexual trauma (MST) are more likely to die by suicide. This is true for both female and male Veterans. Does PTSD increase a person's suicide risk? When someone has PTSD, it may be that their symptoms and the impact of PTSD on daily life may increase risk of suicide. It may also be that other mental health problems that are common for people who have PTSD, like depression and substance use, may increase risk of suicide separate from PTSD symptoms. Data from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) shows that among Veterans getting care in VHA, mental health problems are related to suicide. Among Veterans who died by suicide in 2023, the following diagnoses in the prior calendar year were found: Depression. About 38 out of 100 Veteran suicides, or 38.1% Anxiety: About 27 out of 100 Veteran suicides, or 27.5% PTSD: About 27 out of 100 Veteran suicides, or 26.6% Alcohol use disorder: About 20 out of every 100 Veteran suicides, or 20.3% From 2021 to 2023, the rate of suicide among Veterans with the above mental health problems decreased. What can I do if …? I am thinking about suicide If you are ever thinking about suicide or feel unsafe, use the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline or Veterans Crisis Line (by dialing 988, then pressing 1). See Get Help in a Crisis for additional resources. Services are also available en Español. See Obtenga Ayuda en una Crisis. Everyone feels down from time to time. If you have thoughts about hurting yourself, seek professional help. Many people who have thoughts of suicide also struggle with depression or with drinking or drug problems. A health care professional can help you address these additional concerns. I am dealing with PTSD If you have PTSD and are involved in mental health treatment, your suicide risk will likely be regularly assessed. If suicide risk can be managed safely on an outpatient basis, treatments that are effective for PTSD can help. I am concerned about someone’s safety As a family member, friend, or coworker, you may know someone who is thinking about suicide. When a person tells you they have thoughts about suicide, you can support their recovery. Helping someone can be as simple as asking questions and listening, showing kindness; or, you may be in a more pressing situation, where you can encourage mental health treatment or serve as a helper during a crisis. Both the 988 Lifeline and the Veteran’s Crisis Line offer information and resources to help you be a support for someone at risk of suicide. You can also call either of these resources (dialing 988, or 988 then 1 for Veterans) on behalf of someone else. Someone I know has died by suicide Coping with death can be hard, and even more so when the loss is unexpected or traumatic. Grieving the loss of a loved one is a process. Due to the traumatic nature of suicide, you may struggle to understand the loss or wonder if you missed a warning sign. Know that the process of grieving can be hard to talk about, change over time, and bring reminders on birthdays or holidays. It can also be difficult to cope when a loved one has made a suicide attempt. Getting support for yourself is important. Learn more about the grief process and how you can take care of yourself after a loss or know when you may need professional help. Suicide prevention is a top priority for the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). As such, they offer many coping and support resources for those who are impacted by a suicide. Although some of the resources are specific to Veterans and military families, much of the information may be useful for non-military families as well. Go To Provider Version You May Also Be Interested In PTSD Bytes Podcast Listen to “bite-sized” episodes with supportive tips, tools and practices. VetChange Take control of your drinking and PTSD symptoms. Mobile Apps Apps for self-help, education, and support after trauma. PTSD Information Voice Mail: (802) 296-6300 Email: ncptsd@va.gov Also see: VA Mental Health Site Map return to top CONNECT Veterans Crisis Line: Call: 988 and (Select 1) Social Media Complete Directory EMAIL UPDATES Email Address Required Button to subscribe to email VA HOME Notices Privacy Regulations Web Policies No FEAR Act Site Index USA.gov White House Inspector General QUICK LIST Apply for Benefits Apply for Health Care My Health e Vet Life Insurance Online Applications VA Forms State and Local Resources VA Plans, Budget, & Performance VA Claims Representation RESOURCES Careers at VA Employment Center Veteran Readiness & Employment Homeless Veterans Women Veterans Minority Veterans Plain Language Surviving Spouses & Dependents Adaptive Sports Program ADMINISTRATION Veterans Health Administration Veterans Benefits Administration National Cemetery Administration U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs | 810 Vermont Avenue, NW Washington DC 20420 Last updated March 26, 2026 Get help from Veterans Crisis Line Call 988 (Press 1) Text to 838255 Chat confidentially now Call TTY if you have hearing loss 1-800-799-4889 If you are in crisis or having thoughts of suicide, visit VeteransCrisisLine.net for more resources. Close this modal 